# Quiz: 2D Arrays in Java

## Question 1

Which of the following is true about nested loop iteration?

### Answer Choices

-   The inner-most nested loop must complete all of its iterations before the outer loop begins.
-   The outer-most loop must complete all of its iterations before the inner loop iterates.
-   The outer-most loop and inner-most loop will always iterate at the same rate.
-   **Correct Answer:** The inner-most nested loop must complete all of its iterations before the outer loop continues.

    Good job! You got it right!

## Question 2

Which answer describes how you should set up enhanced `for` loops to iterate through the provided 2D array of `Strings`?

### Code

```java
public class EnhancedForLoops {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        String[][] strTwoD = {{"learn", "study", "remember"},
                              {"read", "memorize", "grasp"},
                              {"master", "know", "retain"}};
    }
}
```

### Answer Choices

-   The outer enhanced `for` loop iterates through each `String` value, and the inner enhanced `for` loop iterates through each `String` value.
-   The outer enhanced `for` loop iterates through each `String` value, while the inner enhanced `for` loop iterates through each array of `String`s.
-   **Correct Answer:** The outer enhanced `for` loop iterates through each array of `String`s, while the inner enhanced `for` loop iterates through each `String` value in the subarray.

    Correct! Good Job! This is because the 2D array is an array of array objects.

-   The outer enhanced `for` loop iterates through each array of `String`s, and the inner enhanced `for` loop iterates through each array of `String`s.

## Question 3

Which of the following is true about Row-major order?

### Answer Choices

-   Row-major order starts at the top right of the 2D array (when viewing it as a matrix) and traverses across each row until it ends at the bottom left corner.
-   Row-major order starts at the top left of the 2D array (when viewing it as a matrix) and traverses down each column until it ends at the bottom right corner.
-   Row-major order starts at the bottom left of the 2D array (when viewing it as a matrix) and traverses up each column until it ends at the top right corner.
-   **Correct Answer:** Row-major order starts at the top left of the 2D array (when viewing it as a matrix) and traverses across each row until it ends at the bottom right corner.

    Correct! Good Job!

## Question 4

Choose the correct code for declaring a 2D `int` array in this Java application.

### Code

```java
public class MyTwoDArray {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        //Declare a 2D int array
        int[][] myTwoD;
    }
}
```

### Answer Choices

-   `[int]` myTwoD;
-   `int` myTwoD;
-   `int[]` myTwoD;
-   `int` myTwoD`[][]`;

**Correct Answer:** `int[][] myTwoD;`

You got it!

## Question 5

Fill in the code for nested loops which traverse the 2D array using column-major order.

### Code

```java
public class ColumnMajor {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        double[][] data = {{1.4, 7.5, 3.5, 8.7, 9.2},
                           {0.8, 2.6, 6.3, 3.4, 7.5}};
        for(int i = 0; i < data[0].length; i++) {
            for(int j = 0; j < data.length; j++) {
                System.out.println(data[j][i]);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Answer Choices

-   `data`
-   `data.size`
-   `data.length`
-   `data[j].length`

**Correct Answer:** `data.length`

Remember that the number of rows `data.length` is used as the inner loop terminating condition for column-major order.

## Question 6

Fill in the correct code to store the `char` `'i'` from the 2D array `twoDChar`.

### Code

```java
public class GetChar {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        char[][] twoDChar = {{'h', 'z', 'u', 'j'},
                             {'o', 'x', 'm', 'p'},
                             {'q', 'i', 'n', 'g'}};
        //Store 'i' from twoDChar
        char result = twoDChar[2][1];
    }
}
```

### Answer Choices

-   `twoDChar[1][2];`
-   `twoDChar[9];`
-   `twoDChar[2][3];`
-   `twoDChar[3][2];`

**Correct Answer:** `twoDChar[2][1];`

You got it!

## Question 7

Using initializer lists, we need the first 2D array to have a top row of `{1,2,3}` and a bottom row of `{4,5,6}`. The second 2D array needs to have a top row of `{7,8,9}` and a bottom row of `{10,11,12}`. Fill in the blanks with the correct code.

### Code

```java
public class Exercise1Solution {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int[][] first = {{1,2,3},{4,5,6}};
        int[][] second;
        second = new int[][] {{7,8,9},{10,11,12}};
    }
}
```

### Answer Choices

-   `{7,8,9,10,11,12};`
-   `{1,2,3,4,5,6};`
-   `{{7,8,9},{10,11,12}};`

**Correct Answer:** `{{7,8,9},{10,11,12}};`

You got it!

## Question 8

Which of the following is true about modifying elements in a 2D array?

### Answer Choices

-   When modifying an element in a 2D array, you access the element using the row index in brackets first, the variable name second, and the column index in brackets third. You then set it equal to a value.
-   When modifying an element in a 2D array, you access the element using the variable name first, the column index in brackets second, and the row index in brackets third. You then set it equal to a value.
-   When modifying an element in a 2D array, you access the element using the row index in brackets first, column index in brackets second, and the variable name third. You then set it equal to a value.

    Incorrect, the format is `variable[row][column] = value`.

-   **Correct Answer:** When modifying an element in a 2D array, you access the element using the variable name first, the row index in brackets second, and the column index in brackets third. You then set it equal to a value.
