# Hello World | Codecademy

# Planting a Tree

## Project Brief

### Objective

Study for the AP Computer Science A Exam (Java)

### Planting a Tree

Introduce yourself to users and plant a tree for them!

### Tasks

7/7 complete

Mark the tasks as complete by checking them off

## Creating the Class

Task 1

We’re starting with a blank Java file named **Tree.java**.

Define a class that follows the Java naming conventions.

Task 2

This code produces an error because our program needs a `main()` method.

Define this method inside the curly braces of the `Tree` class.

Task 3

Write a comment in `main()` that describes the task it will perform.

We’re going to introduce ourselves and print a tree to the screen.

You can use the single-line or multi-line syntax for your comment.

Task 4

Below your comment, print a message introducing yourself to the user.

Try something like “Hey there, I’m Ariel and I’m learning to code in Java!”

When you run the code, you should see this message printed to the screen.

## Planting Trees

Task 5

After introducing yourself, use another print statement to output the project goal!

Something like “I’m going to plant a tree today!” or “Ready to get my hands dirty!”

Task 6

See how the second statement begins on a new line? We’ll use multiple print statements to plant our tree.

For example:

```
    System.out.println("  *  ");    System.out.println(" *** ");    System.out.println(" *** ");    System.out.println("  *  ");    System.out.println("  *  ");   
```

will print a tree like this:

```
  *   ***  ***   *    *  
```

Try it out!

Task 7

Have fun and experiment with different trees.

Here are a couple we made:

```
 * ** *  ******   ****     **      **   ~~~~~~~~~~
```

```
 *****  *****  *****    *      *   #######
```

You can explore other printing methods in the [Java documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/System.html#out).

### Code Review

Get targeted feedback about your code and how well it meets the objective of the project.You can request 1 AI-powered review per project when you complete all tasks.Request code review

Need help?

Get a hint

## Code Editor

Tree.java

Tree.java

Fullscreen Code Editor

Enter Fullscreen Code Editor

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

// Define your tree class in this

file!

public class Tree {

public static void main(String

\[\] args) {

// Introduce myself and print

a tree to the screen.

System.out.println("Hey

there, I’m uke and I’m

learning to code in Java!");

System.out.println("Ready to

get my hands dirty!");

System.out.println("  \*  ");

System.out.println(" \*\*\* ");

System.out.println(" \*\*\* ");

System.out.println("  \*  ");

System.out.println("  \*

");

}

}

ctrl + enter

ctrl + enter

SaveLoading Complete

Copy file

Reset Workspace (ctrl+g)

## Output-only Terminal

Output:

Hey there, I’m uke and I’m learning to code in Java!
Ready to get my hands dirty! \*  
 \*\*\*
\*\*\* \*  
 \*
