# Static Variables and Methods

## Static Methods Refresher

In this lesson, we're going to dive into creating classes with static methods and static variables. Let's start with a quick refresher on static methods.

Static methods belong to an entire class, not a specific object of the class. They are called using the class name and the `.` operator. We've already encountered a few static methods:

```java
double randomNumber = Math.random(); // Stores a random decimal between 0.0 and 1.0 in randomNumber
double number = Double.valueOf("2.5"); // Transforms the String "2.5" into a double
```

In the first example, `random()` is a static method of the `Math` class. We didn't need to create a `Math` object (like `Math myMathObject = new Math()`) to use that method. We could just call it using the class name.

Similarly, `valueOf()` is a static method of the `Double` class. Given a `String` as input, this method turns that `String` into a `double`. Again, we don't need to create a `Double` object to call this method—we use the class itself to call it.

Finally, notice that our `main()` methods have been `static` this whole time. When Java runs your program, it calls the main method of your class—`YourClassName.main()`.

### Exercise: Exploring Static Methods

We've set up some code with a handful of common static methods, including:

-   `Math.random()`
-   `Math.abs()`
-   `Integer.toString()`

Take a look at the documentation for these methods to understand what they do. You can also explore the documentation for the entire `Math` class, which has many more static methods. Find a static method that looks interesting to you, and try to use it!

**Code Example:**

```java
public class ExerciseOne {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int randomNum = (int)(Math.random() * 10) + 1;
    System.out.println("Your random number between one and ten is " + randomNum);

    int negativeNum = -2;
    int absNum = Math.abs(negativeNum);
    System.out.println("The absolute value of " + negativeNum + " is " + absNum);

    String myNewString = Integer.toString(1);
    System.out.println(myNewString);
  }
}
```

**Output:**

```plaintext
Your random number between one and ten is 5
The absolute value of -2 is 2
1
```

## Static Variables

We'll begin writing our own static methods soon, but first, let's look at static variables. Much like static methods, you can think of static variables as belonging to the class itself instead of a particular object of the class.

Just like with static methods, we can access static variables by using the name of the class and the `.` operator. We declare static variables by using the `static` keyword during declaration, which usually comes after the variable's access modifier (`public` or `private`).

When we put this all together, we might end up with a class that looks like this:

```java
public class Dog {
  // Static variables
  public static String genus = "Canis";
  // Instance variables
  public int age;
  public String name;

  public Dog(int inputAge, String inputName) {
    this.age = inputAge;
    this.name = inputName;
  }
}
```

Since all dogs share the same genus, we could use a static variable to store that information for the entire class. However, we want each dog to have its own unique `name` and `age`, so those aren't `static`. We could now access this static variable in a `main()` function like so:

```java
public class Dog {
  // Variables, constructors and methods defined here
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println(Dog.genus); // Prints Canis
  }
}
```

Unlike static methods, you can still access static variables from a specific object of the class. However, no matter what object you use to access the variable, the value will always be the same. You can think of it as all objects of the class sharing the same variable:

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
  Dog snoopy = new Dog(3, "Snoopy");
  Dog ringo = new Dog(5, "Ringo");
  System.out.println(Dog.genus); // Prints Canis
  System.out.println(snoopy.genus); // Prints Canis
  System.out.println(ringo.genus); // Prints Canis
}
```

Finally, you might have seen a few static variables before. If you want easy access to the largest possible integer, you can get it by using `Integer.MAX_VALUE`. This variable is `public`, `static`, and `final` (meaning you can't change the variable's value after creating it).

### Exercise: Creating Static Variables

1. We're building an `ATM` class that has both static and non-static variables. In the `main()` method, use the constructor to create two `ATM`s named `firstATM` and `secondATM`. Use the constructor so the first `ATM` has `1000` dollars in it and the second has `500`. If you'd like, you could print out each `ATM`'s `money` variable to confirm you created them successfully.
2. Create two static variables:
    - A variable to keep track of how much money is in the system across all `ATM`s. This should be a `public static int` variable named `totalMoney` with an initial value of `0`.
    - A variable to know how many `ATM`s there are in the system. This should be a `public static int` variable named `numATMs` with an initial value of `0`.
3. In the `main()` method, print your `totalMoney` variable three different times. The first time, use `ATM.totalMoney`, the second time use `firstATM.totalMoney`, and the third time use `secondATM.totalMoney`. Do you expect these print statements to be the same or different? Right now, the value stored in `totalMoney` doesn't actually represent the total amount of money stored in all ATMs. In the next exercise, we'll look into how to change the value of static variables.

**Code Example:**

```java
public class ATM {
  // Step 2: Create your static variables here
  public static int totalMoney = 0;
  public static int numATMs = 0;
  // Instance variables
  public int money;

  public ATM(int inputMoney) {
    this.money = inputMoney;
  }

  public void withdrawMoney(int amountToWithdraw) {
    if (amountToWithdraw <= this.money) {
      this.money -= amountToWithdraw;
    }
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Step 1: Create your two ATMs here
    ATM firstATM = new ATM(1000);
    ATM secondATM = new ATM(500);
    // Step 3: Print your static variable in three different ways here
    System.out.println(ATM.totalMoney);
    System.out.println(firstATM.totalMoney);
    System.out.println(secondATM.totalMoney);
  }
}
```

**Output:**

```plaintext
0
0
0
```

## Modifying Static Variables

Now that we've created a couple of static variables, let's start to edit them. The good news is that editing static variables is similar to editing any other variable. Whether you're writing code in a constructor, a non-static method, or a static method, you have access to static variables.

Before we jump into the checkpoints, let's think about times when you might want to edit static variables. Often, you'll see static variables used to keep track of information about all objects of a class. For example, our variable `numATMs` keeps track of the total number of `ATM`s in the system. Therefore, every time an `ATM` is created (using the constructor), we should increase that variable by `1`. If we could somehow destroy an `ATM`, the method that destroys it should decrease the `numATMs` static variable by `1`.

Similarly, we have a variable named `totalMoney`. This variable keeps track of all money across all ATMs. Whenever we remove money from an ATM using the non-static `withdrawMoney()` method, we should modify the `money` instance variable for that particular ATM as well as the `totalMoney` variable. In doing so, all ATMs will know how much money is in the system.

### Exercise: Updating Static Variables

1. Edit the constructor to increase `numATMs` by `1` every time an `ATM` is created. In the main method, we're printing out `numATMs` before and after creating some `ATM`s. You should expect to see that number go up as you create `ATM`s.
2. Edit the constructor so when a new `ATM` is created, the amount of money that `ATM` starts with gets added to the static variable `totalMoney`.
3. Edit the `withdrawMoney()` method so when money is taken out of a specific `ATM`, the static variable `totalMoney` also reflects that change. Take a look at the `main()` method—we're printing `totalMoney` before and after withdrawing money from a couple of `ATM`s.

**Code Example:**

```java
public class ATM {
  // Static variables
  public static int totalMoney = 0;
  public static int numATMs = 0;

  // Instance variables
  public int money;

  public ATM(int inputMoney) {
    this.money = inputMoney;
    // Steps 1 and 2: Edit numATMs and totalMoney here
    numATMs += 1;
    totalMoney += inputMoney;
  }

  public void withdrawMoney(int amountToWithdraw) {
    if (amountToWithdraw <= this.money) {
      this.money -= amountToWithdraw;
      // Step 3: Edit totalMoney here
      totalMoney -= amountToWithdraw;
    }
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Total number of ATMs: " + ATM.numATMs);
    ATM firstATM = new ATM(1000);
    ATM secondATM = new ATM(500);
    System.out.println("Total number of ATMs: " + ATM.numATMs);

    System.out.println("Total amount of money in all ATMs: " + ATM.totalMoney);
    firstATM.withdrawMoney(500);
    secondATM.withdrawMoney(200);
    System.out.println("Total amount of money in all ATMs: " + ATM.totalMoney);
  }
}
```

**Output:**

```plaintext
Total number of ATMs: 0
Total number of ATMs: 2
Total amount of money in all ATMs: 1500
Total amount of money in all ATMs: 800
```

## Writing Your Own Static Methods

Now that we've seen how static variables work, let's look into how to write our own static methods.

Let's get the syntax out of the way first—just like with variables, to create a static method, use the `static` keyword in the method's definition. Just like with variables, this keyword usually comes after `public` or `private`.

```java
public static void myFirstStaticMethod() {
  // Some code here
}
```

Often, you'll see static methods that are accessors or mutators for static variables:

```java
public static int getMyStaticVariable() {
  return myStaticVariable;
}
public static void setMyStaticVariable(int newValue) {
  myStaticVariable = newValue;
}
```

One important rule to note is that static methods can't interact with non-static instance variables. To understand this, consider why we use `this` when working with non-static instance variables. Let's say we have a `Dog` class with a non-static instance variable named `age`. If we have a line of code like `this.age = 5;`, that means we're setting the `age` of a specific `Dog` equal to `5`. However, if `age` were static, that would mean that the variable belongs to the entire class, not a specific object.

The `this` keyword can't be used by a static method since static methods are associated with an entire class, not a specific object of that class. If you try to mix `this` with a static method, you'll see the error message `non-static variable this cannot be referenced from a static context`.

### Exercise: Creating Static Methods

1. Let's write a static method that prints the average amount of money in all vending machines in the system. The method name should be `averageMoney` and it should be `void` since it doesn't return anything. The method should print `totalMoney` divided by `numATMs`. Note that both of those variables are static. After writing the method, call the method at the end of the `main()` method. Recall that since this is a static method, you'll use the name of the class to call the method, not an object of the class.
2. Let's try to have `averageMoney()` interact with a non-static instance variable. In `averageMoney()`, try to print `this.money`. You should expect to see an error message—a static method can't interact with a non-static instance variable.

**Code Example:**

```java
public class ATM {
  // Static variables
  public static int totalMoney = 0;
  public static int numATMs = 0;

  // Instance variables
  public int money;

  public ATM(int inputMoney) {
    this.money = inputMoney;
    numATMs += 1;
    totalMoney += inputMoney;
  }

  public void withdrawMoney(int amountToWithdraw) {
    if (amountToWithdraw <= this.money) {
      this.money -= amountToWithdraw;
      totalMoney -= amountToWithdraw;
    }
  }

  // Write your averageMoney() method here
  public static void averageMoney() {
    System.out.println(totalMoney / numATMs);
    // System.out.println(this.money); // This line would cause an error
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Total number of ATMs: " + ATM.numATMs);
    ATM firstATM = new ATM(1000);
    ATM secondATM = new ATM(500);
    System.out.println("Total number of ATMs: " + ATM.numATMs);

    System.out.println("Total amount of money in all ATMs: " + ATM.totalMoney);
    firstATM.withdrawMoney(500);
    secondATM.withdrawMoney(200);
    System.out.println("Total amount of money in all ATMs: " + ATM.totalMoney);

    // Call averageMoney() here
    ATM.averageMoney();
  }
}
```

**Output (with error commented out):**

```plaintext
Total number of ATMs: 0
Total number of ATMs: 2
Total amount of money in all ATMs: 1500
Total amount of money in all ATMs: 800
400
```

**Note:** If you uncomment the line `System.out.println(this.money);` in `averageMoney()`, you will see the error: `non-static variable this cannot be referenced from a static context`.

## Review

Great work! You now have an understanding of what the `static` keyword does. If you've made it this far in your Java lessons, you probably have a good sense of what all the keywords and jargon are doing in `public static void main(String[] args)`. Take a moment to celebrate—that line of code can be incredibly intimidating for new learners, and it's a real accomplishment to learn about all of those different pieces.

To review, here are some of the main takeaways about static methods and variables:

-   Static methods and variables are associated with the class as a whole, not objects of the class.
-   Static methods and variables are declared as static by using the `static` keyword upon declaration.
-   Static methods cannot interact with non-static instance variables. This is due to static methods not having a `this` reference.
-   Both static methods and non-static methods can interact with static variables.

### Exercise: Experiment with Static Variables and Methods

We've provided the complete code for your `ATM` class. Feel free to experiment with these static variables and methods. In particular, you might want to create a few more `ATM`s in the `main()` method and see how the static variables change. You could also consider writing a `depositMoney()` method that works in the opposite way as `withdrawMoney()`.

**Code Example:**

```java
public class ATM {
  // Static variables
  public static int totalMoney = 0;
  public static int numATMs = 0;

  // Instance variables
  public int money;

  public ATM(int inputMoney) {
    this.money = inputMoney;
    numATMs += 1;
    totalMoney += inputMoney;
  }

  public void withdrawMoney(int amountToWithdraw) {
    if (amountToWithdraw <= this.money) {
      this.money -= amountToWithdraw;
      totalMoney -= amountToWithdraw;
    }
  }

  public static void averageMoney() {
    System.out.println(totalMoney / numATMs);
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Total number of ATMs: " + ATM.numATMs);
    ATM firstATM = new ATM(1000);
    ATM secondATM = new ATM(500);
    System.out.println("Total number of ATMs: " + ATM.numATMs);

    System.out.println("Total amount of money in all ATMs: " + ATM.totalMoney);
    firstATM.withdrawMoney(500);
    secondATM.withdrawMoney(200);
    System.out.println("Total amount of money in all ATMs: " + ATM.totalMoney);

    // Call averageMoney() here
    ATM.averageMoney();
  }
}
```

**Output:**

```plaintext
Total number of ATMs: 0
Total number of ATMs: 2
Total amount of money in all ATMs: 1500
Total amount of money in all ATMs: 800
400
```
