# Loops | Codecademy

# The Prime Directive

## Project Brief

### Objective

Study for the AP Computer Science A Exam (Java)

### The Prime Directive

Finding prime numbers is a common technical challenge in programming interviews.

As it happens, Java loops are a great tool to help you do this!

A prime number is an integer greater than 1 that is only divisible by 1 and itself.

For example, 2, 3, 5, and 7 are all prime numbers, but 4, 6, 8, and 9 are not.

Your prime directive: Build a **PrimeDirective.java** program that creates an `ArrayList` of all prime numbers in an array.

### Tasks

15/15 complete

Mark the tasks as complete by checking them off

## Setting Up

1.

Take a look at **PrimeDirective.java**:

There’s a class `PrimeDirective` where you’ll be creating your program.

Inside `main()`, an instance of `PrimeDirective` (`pd`) has been instantiated. Below that, you’ll see an `int` array called `numbers` that has a series of integers.

**To Do:** Import `ArrayList` from `java.util` at the very top of your program, above the `PrimeDirective` class. This will allow you to use `ArrayList`s.

Hint

This line should be at the top of the file:

```
import java.util.ArrayList;
```

## Optimus Prime

2.

First, we need a way to determine whether a number is prime or isn’t prime.

Create an empty `public` method `isPrime()` that:

-   has one parameter: an `int` called `number`
-   will return `true` if `number` is prime
-   will return `false` if `number` is not prime

Hint

A method that returns `true` and `false` should have a `boolean` return type.

```
public boolean isPrime(int number) {  // method body goes here}
```

3.

Take a moment to consider what makes a prime number prime:

-   greater than 1
-   only divisible by 1 and itself

In fact, every number is divisible by 1, so we don’t really care about being able to divide by 1.

Imagine we have a number `n`. If `n` is prime, then `n` should not be divisible by any integers between `2` and `n-1`.

But how can we check this?

Before you move on, take out paper and a pencil and write down your ideas about how to check if a number is prime.

Hint

If you smell a `for` loop or the `%` operator coming, you’re onto something…

4.

Inside `isPrime()`, create a `for` loop:

-   set a counter `i` equal to `2`
-   run the loop while `i` is less than `number`
-   increment `i`

Hint

```
for (int i = 2; i < number; i++) {  // check divisibility here}
```

5.

As you loop through each `i` value, you want to check if `number` is divisible by it.

Inside the loop:

-   Check if `number` is divisible by `i`.
-   If it is, then `number` is not prime, so you can return `false` from the method.

Hint

To check if `age` is divisible by 4, you could use modulo (`%`) like this:

```
if (age % 4 == 0) {  // stuff happens}
```

The `if` statement should look like this now:

```
if (number % i == 0) {  return false;}
```

6.

Below the `for` loop, return `true` because `number` isn’t divisible by any two smaller integers.

7.

Wait a second… what about 2 or numbers less than 2? Well, those are our edge cases.

In `isPrime()` above the `for` loop, build an `if`/`else if` statement to handle the following edge cases:

-   If `number` is 2, it is the smallest prime number.
-   If `number` is less than 2, it is not prime.

Hint

Your edge case handling should look something like this:

```
if (number == 2) {  return true;} else if (number < 2) {  return false;}
```

8.

Test out your `isPrime()` method on `pd` in `main()` and see if it works!

Try it out with a few numbers:

-   `7` should return `true`
-   `28` should return `false`
-   `2` should return `true`
-   `0` should return `false`

Don’t forget to run your code with the following:

```
java PrimeDirective
```

Hint

You can check if `isPrime()` is working as expected like this:

```
System.out.println(pd.isPrime(6));// should print false
```

If nothing happens, you may have a typo somewhere in your code — try compiling:

```
javac PrimeDirective.java
```

## Only Primes

9.

Nice work! Now, all that’s left is building an `ArrayList` of the prime numbers in the `numbers` array.

You can create another method to handle this. Build an empty method called `onlyPrimes()` that:

-   returns an `ArrayList` of integers
-   has a parameter `numbers`, which is an array of `int`s

Hint

`.onlyPrimes()` should look like this so far:

```
public ArrayList<Integer> onlyPrimes(int[] numbers) {  // method body goes here}
```

10.

Inside the `onlyPrimes()` body, create a new empty `ArrayList` called `primes` to store all the prime numbers that are found.

Hint

```
ArrayList<Integer> primes = new ArrayList<Integer>();
```

11.

So how do you find all of the primes in an array? By using a for-each loop!

Set up a for-each loop that checks each `number` in `numbers`.

Hint

For-each loops look like:

```
for (String animal : animals) {  // do something with animal}
```

In this case, the loop should look like:

```
for (int number : numbers) {  // loop body}
```

12.

Now, if `number` is prime, you can add it to `primes`.

Hint

Because `.isPrime()` is another public method in `PrimeDirective`, you can access it inside `onlyPrimes()` to check if `number` is prime:

```
isPrime(number)// returns true or false
```

To add something to an `ArrayList` called `cats`:

```
cats.add("Captain McNugget");
```

13.

At the end of the method below the for-each loop, return `primes` from `onlyPrimes()`.

Hint

The method should look something like this:

```
public ArrayList<Integer> onlyPrimes(int[] numbers) {  ArrayList<Integer> primes = new ArrayList<Integer>();  for (int number : numbers) {    if (isPrime(number)) {      primes.add(number);    }  }  return primes;}
```

14.

Time to put it all together!

In `main()`, test out `pd.onlyPrimes()` on the `numbers` array.

Don’t forget to run your code with

```
java PrimeDirective
```

Hint

You can check if `onlyPrimes()` is working as expected like this:

```
System.out.println(pd.onlyPrimes(numbers));// should print [29, 11, 101, 43, 89]
```

If nothing happens, you may have a typo somewhere in your code — try compiling:

```
javac PrimeDirective.java
```

## Primed For More

15.

Congrats on completing the Prime Directive!

Want to do even more? Check the hint for some ideas to expand the project.

Hint

-   Build a method that filters an array for odd or even numbers (bonus points if it can do either depending on arguments passed in!).
-   Build a method that returns an `ArrayList` of the first `n` primes in an array.
-   Build a method that returns an `ArrayList` of the first `n` [Fibonacci numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number).

### Code Review

Get targeted feedback about your code and how well it meets the objective of the project.You can request 1 AI-powered review per project when you complete all tasks.Request code review

## Code Editor

PrimeDirective.java

PrimeDirective.java

Fullscreen Code Editor

Enter Fullscreen Code Editor

```java
// Import statement:
import java.util.ArrayList;

class PrimeDirective {

  // Add your methods here:
  public boolean isPrime(int number) {
    if (number == 2) {
      return true;
    } else if (number < 2) {
      return false;
    }

    for(int i = 2; i < number; i++) {
      if(number % i == 0) {
        return false;
      }
    }

    return true;
  }

  public ArrayList<Integer> onlyPrimes(int[] numbers) {
    // method body goes here
    ArrayList<Integer> primes = new ArrayList<>();

    for(int number : numbers) {
      if(isPrime(number) == true) {
        primes.add(number);
      }
    }

    return primes;
  }


  public static void main(String[] args) {

    PrimeDirective pd = new PrimeDirective();
    int[] numbers = {6, 29, 28, 33, 11, 100, 101, 43, 89};

    for(int i = 0; i < numbers.length; i++) {
      System.out.println(numbers[i] + ": " + pd.isPrime(numbers[i]));
    }

    System.out.println(pd.onlyPrimes(numbers));
  }

}
```

ctrl + enter

ctrl + enter

SaveLoading Complete

Copy file

Reset Workspace (ctrl+g)

## Terminal

new terminal

bash

bash session

Fullscreen Terminal

Enter Fullscreen Terminal

$ javac PrimeDirective.java

$ java PrimeDirective

6: false

29: true

28: false

33: false

11: true

100: false

101: true

43: true

89: true

\[29, 11, 101, 43, 89\]

$

W

$ javac PrimeDirective.java

$ java PrimeDirective

6: false

29: true

28: false

33: false

11: true

100: false

101: true

43: true

89: true

\[29, 11, 101, 43, 89\]

$

## Embedded Content

---
