# Learn Java: Variables

## Introduction

Let's say we need a program that connects a user with new jobs. We need the user's name, their salary, and their employment status. All of these pieces of information are stored in our program.

We store information in [variables](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/variables?page_ref=catalog), named locations in memory. Naming a piece of information allows us to use that name later, accessing the information we stored.

Variables also give context and meaning to the data we're storing. The value `42` could be someone's age, a weight in pounds, or the number of orders placed. With a name, we **know** the value `42` is `age`, `weightInPounds`, or `numOrdersPlaced`.

In Java, we specify the type of information we're storing. [Primitive data types](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/data-types?page_ref=catalog) are types of data built-in to the Java system. The three main primitive types we'll cover are `int`, `double`, and `boolean`; this lesson will introduce these built-in types and more.

We must _declare_ a variable to reference it within our program. Declaring a variable requires that we specify the type and name:

```java
// datatype variableName
int age;
double salaryRequirement;
boolean isEmployed;
```

The names of the variables above are `age`, `salaryRequirement`, and `isEmployed`.

These variables don't have any associated value. To assign a value to a variable, we use the assignment operator `=`:

```java
age = 85;
```

Now, `age` has a value of `85`. When code is used to represent a fixed value, like `85`, it is referred to as a _literal_.

It's also common to declare a variable and assign it a value in one line! For example, to assign `2011` to a variable named `yearCodecademyWasFounded` of type `int`, we write:

```java
int yearCodecademyWasFounded = 2011;
```

### Instructions

1. In **Creator.java**, we have defined some variables related to James Gosling, the creator of Java. Inside `main()`, use `System.out.println()` to print out the variable `name`.

    > Hint
    > We do not use double quotes to print a variable because we want to print what the variable references.
    >
    > ```java
    > String cat = "Buffy";
    > System.out.println("cat");
    > // prints cat
    > System.out.println(cat);
    > // prints Buffy
    > ```

2. Use the same command to print out `yearCreated`.

    > Hint
    > We have to write print statements after declaring and initializing the variable:
    >
    > ```java
    > System.out.println(cat);
    > String cat = "Buffy";
    > // this code will have an error, since cat is not defined yet!
    > ```
    >
    > ```java
    > String cat = "Buffy";
    > System.out.println(cat);
    > // this code will run, since cat is assigned the value of "Buffy"!
    > ```

### Code Example

```java
public class Creator {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        String name = "James Gosling";
        int yearCreated = 1995;
        System.out.println(name);
        System.out.println(yearCreated);
    }
}
```

### Output

```
James Gosling
1995
```

## ints

The first type of data we will store is the whole number. Whole numbers are very common in programming. You often see them used to store ages, or maximum sizes, or the number of times some code has been run, among many other uses.

In Java, whole numbers are stored in the _int_ primitive data type. `int`s hold positive numbers, negative numbers, and zero. They do not store fractions or numbers with decimals in them.

The `int` data type allows values between -2,147,483,648 and 2,147,483,647, inclusive.

To declare a variable of type `int`, we use the `int` keyword before the variable name:

```java
// int variable declaration
int yearJavaWasCreated;
// assignment
yearJavaWasCreated = 1996;
// declaration and assignment
int numberOfPrimitiveTypes = 8;
```

### Instructions

1. The file **CountComment.java** has a number of comments in it. In your head, count the number of comments. Then, inside the `main()` method, declare a variable called `numComments` that holds how many comments you counted.

    > Hint
    > Remember to declare your variable using the `int` keyword, followed by the variable name `numComments`. Then, assign the count of comments you've made to this variable.

2. Print out `numComments`.

    > Hint
    > To print out the `numComments` variable, use the `System.out.println()` function and pass `numComments` as an argument. This will display the value of `numComments` in the console.

### Code Example

```java
// This is the class declaration
public class CountComment {
    // This is the main method that runs when you compile
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // This is where you will define your variable
        int numComments = 6;
        // This is where you will print your variable
        System.out.println(numComments);
    }
    // This is the end of the class
}
// This is outside the class
```

### Output

```
6
```

## doubles

Whole numbers don't accomplish what we need for every program. What if we wanted to store the price of something? We need a decimal point. What if we wanted to store the world's population? That number would be larger than the `int` type can hold.

The `double` primitive data type can help. `double` can hold decimals as well as very large and very small numbers. The maximum value is 1.797,693,134,862,315,7 E+308, which is approximately 17 followed by 307 zeros. The minimum value is 4.9 E-324, which is 324 decimal places!

To declare a variable of type `double`, we use the `double` keyword in the declaration:

```java
// doubles can have decimal places:
double price = 8.99;
// doubles can have values bigger than what an int could hold:
double gdp = 12237700000;
```

### Instructions

1. As of 2016, Android has 81.7 percent of the market share for mobile operating systems. Create a variable called `androidShare` that holds this percentage as a double.

    > Hint
    > To create a variable of type `double`, you need to use the `double` keyword followed by the variable name and then assign the value. In this case, the variable name would be `androidShare` and the value would be `81.7`.

2. Print out `androidShare` to the console.

    > Hint
    > To print the value of `androidShare` to the console, you can use the `System.out.println()` function and pass `androidShare` as the argument.

### Code Example

```java
public class MarketShare {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        double androidShare = 81.7;
        System.out.println(androidShare);
    }
}
```

### Output

```
81.7
```

## booleans

Often our programs face questions that can only be answered with yes or no. Is the oven on? Is the light green? Did I eat breakfast?

These questions are answered with a _boolean_, a type that references one of two values: `true` or `false`.

We declare boolean [variables](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/variables) by using the keyword `boolean` before the variable name.

```java
boolean javaIsACompiledLanguage = true;
boolean javaIsACupOfCoffee = false;
```

In future lessons, we'll see how `boolean` values help navigate decisions in our programs.

### Instructions

1. Create a variable called `intsCanHoldDecimals`. Set it to `true` if the `int` type can hold a decimal number. Set it to `false` if the `int` type cannot do this.

    > Hint
    > To create a boolean variable, use the keyword `boolean` followed by the variable name. Then, assign it a value of either `true` or `false` based on your understanding of whether the `int` type can hold a decimal number or not.

2. Print out your `intsCanHoldDecimals` variable.

    > Hint
    > To print out your `intsCanHoldDecimals` variable, you can use the `System.out.println()` function in Java. Make sure to pass your variable as the argument to this function.

### Code Example

```java
public class Booleans {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        boolean intsCanHoldDecimals = false;
        System.out.println(intsCanHoldDecimals);
    }
}
```

### Output

```
false
```

## char

How do we answer questions like: What grade did you get on the test? What letter does your name start with?

The `char` data type can hold any character, like a letter, space, or punctuation mark. It must be surrounded by single quotes, `'` .

For example:

```java
char grade = 'A';
char firstLetter = 'p';
char punctuation = '!';
```

### Instructions

1. Create a variable called `expectedGrade` of type `char`. Fill it with a single letter, representing the grade you think you would get in a graded Java course where the grades `A`, `B`, `C`, `D`, and `F` are possible.

    > Hint
    > To create a variable in Java, you need to specify the type, followed by the variable name, an equals sign, the value you want to assign, and finally a semicolon. Remember, the value for a `char` variable should be surrounded by single quotes.

2. Print out your `expectedGrade` variable!

    > Hint
    > To print out your `expectedGrade` variable, you can use the `System.out.println()` function in Java. Remember to pass your variable as the argument to this function.

### Code Example

```java
public class Char {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        char expectedGrade = 'A';
        System.out.println(expectedGrade);
    }
}
```

### Output

```
A
```

## String

So far, we have learned primitive [data types](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/data-types), which are the simplest types of data with no built-in behavior. Our programs will also use [String](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/strings?page_ref=catalog)s, which are _objects_, instead of primitives. Objects have built-in behavior.

`String`s hold sequences of characters. We've already seen instances of a `String`, for example, when we printed out `"Hello World"`. There are two ways to create a `String` object: using a `String` literal or calling the `String` class to create a new `String` object.

A _String literal_ is any sequence of characters enclosed in double-quotes (`""`). Like primitive-type [variables](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/variables), we declare a `String` variable by specifying the type first:

```java
String greeting = "Hello World";
```

We could also create a _new String object_ by calling the `String` class when declaring a `String` like so:

```java
String salutations = new String("Hello World");
```

There are subtle differences in behavior depending on whether you create a `String` using a `String` literal or a new `String` object. We'll dive into those later, but for now, we'll almost always be using `String` literals.

### Keep Reading: AP Computer Science A Students

Certain symbols, known as escape sequences, have an alternative use in Java print statements. Escape sequences are interpreted differently by the [compiler](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/compiler) than other characters. Escape characters begin with the character `\`.

There are three escape sequences to be aware of for the AP exam.

The `\"` escape sequence allows us to add quotation marks `"` to a `String` value:

```java
System.out.println("\"Hello World\"");
// Prints: "Hello World"
```

If we didn't use an escape sequence, then Java would think we're using `"` to end the String!

Using the `\\` escape sequence allows us to place backslashes in our `String` text:

```java
System.out.println("This is the backslash symbol: \\");
// Prints: This is the backslash symbol: \
```

This is similar to the last example - just like `"`, `\` usually has a special meaning. In this case, `\` is used to start an escape sequence. Well, if we don't want to start an escape sequence and just want a `\` in our String, then we'll use `\\` — we're using an escape sequence to say that we don't want `\` to be interpreted as the start of an escape sequence. It's a little mind-bending!

Finally, if we place a `\n` escape sequence in a `String`, the compiler will [output](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/output) a new line of text:

```java
System.out.println("Hello\nGoodbye");
/* Prints:
Hello
Goodbye */
```

You can think of `\n` as the escape sequence for "newline".

### Instructions

1. Create a variable called `openingLyrics` that has a value of: `"Yesterday, all my troubles seemed so far away"`.

    > Hint
    > Remember, you can create a string variable with the following syntax:
    >
    > ```java
    > String stringName = "I am an example string!";
    > ```
    >
    > You do not need to escape any characters using `\` for this checkpoint.

2. Call `System.out.println()` to print out `openingLyrics`.

    > Hint
    > To print out the `openingLyrics` variable, you need to pass it as an argument to the `System.out.println()` function. Remember, you don't need to put quotes around variable names when you're using them in your code.

### Code Example

```java
public class Song {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        String openingLyrics = "Yesterday, all my troubles seemed so far away";
        System.out.println(openingLyrics);
    }
}
```

### Output

```
Yesterday, all my troubles seemed so far away
```

## Static Checking

The Java programming language has [_static typing_](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/data-types?page_ref=catalog). Java programs will not compile if a variable is assigned a value of an incorrect type. This is a _bug_, specifically a type declaration bug.

Bugs are dangerous! They cause our code to crash, or produce incorrect results. Static typing helps because bugs are caught during programming rather than during execution of the code.

The program will not compile if the declared type of the variable does not match the type of the assigned value:

```java
int greeting = "Hello World";
```

The String `"Hello World"` cannot be held in a variable of type `int`.

For the example above, we see an error in the console at compilation:

```
error: incompatible types: String cannot be converted to int
    int greeting = "Hello World";
```

When bugs are not caught at compilation, they interrupt execution of the code by causing [_runtime errors_](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/errors?page_ref=catalog). The program will crash.

Java's static typing helps programmers avoid runtime errors, and thus have much safer code that is free from bugs.

### Instructions

1. In the **Mess.java** file, we have declared a bunch of variables with the wrong type. Try to compile the file using the command:

    ```bash
    javac Mess.java
    ```

    > Hint
    > To compile the Java file, you'll need to open a terminal or command prompt, navigate to the directory where the **Mess.java** file is located, and then run the `javac Mess.java` command.

2. Change the types of the variables so that they correspond with the type of the assignment values. For example, `year` is assigned `2001`, so it should be an `int`.

    > Hint
    > To correct the types of the variables, you'll need to identify the type of each assigned value. If a value is enclosed in quotes, it's a string. If it's a whole number without quotes, it's an integer. If it's a decimal number, it's a double. If it's true or false, it's a boolean.

3. Compile the file again. Look at how it compiles with no errors now!

    > Hint
    > You can check that the file has compiled by typing in `ls` in the terminal. If it compiled successfully, you should see:
    >
    > ```
    > Mess.class  Mess.java
    > ```
    >
    > This output means that **Mess.java** compiled into **Mess.class**!

### Code Example

```java
public class Mess {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        /*
        int genre = 'C';
        boolean runtime = 1.58;
        char isPG = true;
        int year = 2001;
        double title = "Shrek";
        */
        int year = 2001;
        String title = "Shrek";
        char genre = 'C';
        double runtime = 1.58;
        boolean isPG = true;
    }
}
```

## Naming

Let's imagine we're storing a user's name for their profile. Which code example do you think is better?

```java
String data = "Delilah";
```

or

```java
String nameOfUser = "Delilah";
```

While both of these will compile, the second example is much easier to understand. Readers of the code will know the purpose of the value: `"Delilah"`.

Naming [variables](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/variables) according to convention leads to clear, readable, and maintainable code. When someone else, or our future self, reads the code, there is no confusion about the purpose of a variable.

In Java, variable names are case-sensitive. `myHeight` is a different variable from `myheight`. The length of a variable name is unlimited, but we should keep it concise while keeping the meaning clear.

A variable starts with a valid letter, or a `$`, or a `_`. No other symbols or numbers can begin a variable name. `1stPlace` and `*Gazer` are not valid variable names.

Variable names of only one word are spelled in all lowercase letters. Variable names of more than one word have the first letter lowercase while the beginning letter of each subsequent word is capitalized. This style of capitalization is called _camelCase_.

```java
// good style
boolean isHuman;
// bad styles
// no capitalization for new word
boolean ishuman;
// first word should be lowercase
boolean IsHuman;
// underscores don't separate words
boolean is_human;
```

### Instructions

1. In the **BadNames.java** file, we declared variables with confusing names. Run the file and look at the error messages you get when trying to compile.

    > Hint
    > Pay attention to the error messages that appear, as they will give you clues about what's wrong with the variable names.

2. Some of these variable names are _illegal_! Change the ones that are preventing the file from compiling.

    > Hint
    > To resolve the illegal variable names, look for variable names that start with a number or a special character, as these are not allowed in Java. Also, ensure that variable names do not contain any spaces.

### Code Example

```java
public class BadNames {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        String firstName = "Samira";
        String givenName = "Smith";
        String emailAddr = "samira@google.com";
        int salaryExpectation = 100000;
        int yearOfBirth = 1955;
        System.out.println("The program runs!");
    }
}
```

### Output

```
The program runs!
```

## Review

Creating and filling [variables](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/variables) is a powerful concept that allows us to keep track of all kinds of data in our program.

In this lesson, we learned how to create and print several different [data types](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/data-types) in Java, which you'll use as you create bigger and more complex programs.

We covered:

-   `int`, which stores whole numbers.
-   `double`, which stores bigger whole numbers and decimal numbers.
-   `boolean`, which stores `true` and `false`.
-   `char`, which stores single characters using single quotes.
-   `String`, which stores multiple characters using double quotes.
-   _Static typing_, which is one of the safety features of Java.
-   Variable naming conventions.

Practice declaring variables and assigning values to make sure you have a solid foundation for learning more complicated and exciting Java concepts!

### Instructions

1. The file **MyProfile.java** contains a class that represents your hiring profile as presented to potential employers. In the `main()` method, create a variable called `name` that holds your name, as a sequence of characters.

    > Hint
    > If we were defining a variable called `userID` that would hold a string of letters, we would use a line like this:
    >
    > ```java
    > String userID = "myUsername";
    > ```
    >
    > You can use the same sort of declaration and initialization for your `name` variable!

2. Create a variable called `age` that holds your age as a whole number.

    > Hint
    > To create the variable `age`, you'll need to use the `int` data type, which is used to store whole numbers in Java. Remember to follow the variable naming conventions we discussed.

3. Create a variable called `desiredSalary` that holds your desired salary per year to a precision of two decimal points.

    > Hint
    > If we were defining a variable called `gpa` that would hold a decimal number, we would use a line like this:
    >
    > ```java
    > double gpa = 5.1;
    > ```
    >
    > You can use the same sort of declaration and initialization for your `desiredSalary` variable!

4. Create a variable called `gender` that holds a single character, `m` (male), `f` (female), `n` (for none), or `o` (for other).

    > Hint
    > To create a variable that holds a single character, you can use the `char` data type. Remember to enclose the character in single quotes.

5. Create a variable called `lookingForJob` that holds whether or not you are currently open to job offers.

    > Hint
    > If we were defining a variable called `isLightOn` that would hold either true or false, we would use a line like this:
    >
    > ```java
    > boolean isLightOn = true;
    > ```
    >
    > You can use the same sort of declaration and initialization for your `lookingForJob` variable!

### Code Example

```java
public class MyProfile {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        String name = "uke lyu";
        int age = 21;
        double desiredSalary = 12000.00;
        char gender = 'm';
        boolean lookingForJob = false;
    }
}
```
