# Casting and Converting in Java

## Introduction

Learn how to transform a value of one data type to another in Java. If you aren't familiar with the folk tale _The Little Glass Slipper_, a magical entity casts a spell that transforms the protagonist's clothing type from work attire to formal wear. As programmers, we can do something similar by transforming a value of one primitive data type to another using **type casting**.

## Numerical-Based Casting

When we use casting to change the data type of number-based values, it can impact how much data the value holds. If there is less data in the value after casting, it's considered _narrow type casting_. If the value contains more data after casting, it's classified as _widening type casting_.

In order to cast, we need to use a _casting operator_ to alert the compiler that we want to create a temporary value that is a converted data type. Two casting operators we will focus on are `(int)` and `(double)`.

### Narrow Type Casting

To convert a `double` to an `int`, we would place the casting operator `(int)` in front of a value we would like to convert. For example:

```java
double numDouble = 12.99;
System.out.println("Double value: " + numDouble);
// convert a double to int
int numInt = (int) numDouble;
System.out.println("Int value: " + numInt);
```

This would output:

```
Double value: 12.99
Int value: 12
```

When we convert a `double` to an `int`, the digits to the right of the decimal point are truncated. Of course, when we see a value like `12.99`, we know that it's numerically closer in value to `13` than it is to `12`. Java does not automatically round the value. If we want to round our positive value to the nearest integer, we can use `(int)(value + 0.5)`; in the case that our number is negative, we would instead use `(int)(x - 0.5)`:

```java
double numDouble = 12.99;
System.out.println("Double value: " + numDouble);
// convert a double to an int rounded to nearest value
int numInt = (int) (numDouble + 0.5);
System.out.println("Int value: " + numInt);
```

This would output:

```
Double value: 12.99
Int value: 13
```

### Fill in the Blank Question

Fill in the blank so that the following program outputs `25`:

```java
double num1 = 24.72;
int num2 = (int)(num1 + 0.5);
System.out.println(num2);
```

**Answer**: `0.5`

### Integer Range and Overflow

It's important to be aware that there are limitations when working with whole number, or `int`, values in Java. There is a limited amount of data that can be stored in an `int` — 4 bytes. We can use `Integer.MIN_VALUE` and `Integer.MAX_VALUE` to find the minimum and maximum value of an `int`:

```java
System.out.println("Min: " + Integer.MIN_VALUE); // Prints: Min: -2147483648
System.out.println("Max: " + Integer.MAX_VALUE); // Prints: Max: 2147483647
```

If we created an expression that evaluated a value outside of this range, we would be faced with an integer overflow, which could result in an error or having an incorrect value that's within the allowed range.

### Coding Question

Try outputting these `int` values that exist outside the appropriate range. When you run the program, consider the following questions:

-   Which variable causes an error?
-   Which variable outputs an incorrect value?

You will need to comment out the variable that is causing an error in order to see the variable with the incorrect value.

```java
class IntegerRange {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // the variable a is declared with a value outside the range
        // int a = 3147483647;
        // System.out.println(a);
        // the sum of the following expression is outside the appropriate int range
        int b = 2147483645 + 3;
        System.out.println(b);
    }
}
```

**Output**:

```
-2147483648
```

### Widening Type Casting

If we were to use casting to change an `int` value to a `double`, we'd need to implement the `(double)` casting operator in our code:

```java
int numInt = 9;
System.out.println("Int value: " + numInt);
// convert an int to a double
System.out.println("Double value: " + (double)numInt);
```

This will output:

```
Int value: 9
Double value: 9.0
```

In the program above, we did not change the type of `numInt` in the second print statement; instead, we created a temporary value when we casted `numInt` as a `double`. If we wanted to permanently save that value, we could create a new variable like `double newValue = (double)numInt`.

Unlike in narrow type casting, an `int` value can _automatically_ get cast to a `double` value in Java code. For example, this occurrence can happen when we create an arithmetic expression that references a `double` and an `int`:

```java
System.out.println(100.0 / 5); // Prints: 20.0
```

Java automatically casts the value as a `double` even though one of the values in the expression was an `int`.

We can also cast the value of an expression as a double even if both values in the expression are `int`s. To do this, we'll place `(double)` in front of an expression that is contained in its own set of parentheses like so:

```java
System.out.println((double)(100 / 5)); // Prints: 20.0
```

### Multiple Choice Question

Does the following code show narrow type casting or widening type casting?

```java
System.out.println((double)(13 * 5));
```

**Answer**: Widening type casting  
**Explanation**: We convert the value of `13 * 5` from an `int` value to a `double` value using the `(double)` casting operator.

## Converting Integer and String Values

In Java, we can convert an `int` value to a `String` value and vice versa. This doesn't count as casting because a `String` is not a primitive type value, but it can be useful to know how to perform this conversion. To change the value of an `int` into a `String`, we need to use the `valueOf()` method from the `String` class:

```java
int numInt = 15;
System.out.println("Int value: " + numInt);
// Convert int value to String
String numString = String.valueOf(numInt);
System.out.println("String value: " + numString);
```

This will output:

```
Int value: 15
String value: 15
```

Even though the output looks the same, the second output shows us a `String` value instead of an `int` value.

If we wanted to turn a `String` value into an `int`, we would need to call the `parseInt()` method from the `Integer` class. In order to call this method, we will reference the class `Integer` and then call the method `parseInt()` by using the dot operator (`.`). Altogether, this call would look like this `Integer.parseInt(argumentValue)`.

Let's see this in action by converting the `String` value `"12"` into an `int`:

```java
String numString = "12";
// convert String to int
int numInt = Integer.parseInt(numString);
System.out.println("The int value: " + numInt); // Prints: The int value: 12
// we can now use the value like any other int
numInt++;
System.out.println(numInt); // Prints: 13
```

Note that the value in the `String` MUST contain a numerical value in order to convert it into an `int`. If we tried to run the code `Integer.parseInt("hello");`, we would receive an error.

### Multiple Choice Question

True or False: A `String` can be converted into an `int` using the `String.valueOf()` method.

**Answer**: False  
**Explanation**: To convert a `String` to an `int`, we need to use the `Integer.parseInt()` method.

## Conclusions

Great job reaching the end of this article. Let's go over what we learned:

-   Casting is the process of converting a value of one primitive data type to another.
-   Narrow type casting occurs when the amount of data held by a value decreases after conversion.
-   To convert a `double` into an `int`, we must use the `(int)` casting operator.
-   Narrow type casting does not automatically occur in Java and must be done manually by the programmer.
-   Widening type casting occurs when a value increases how much data it holds after casting.
-   To convert an `int` to a `double`, we need to use the `(double)` casting operator.
-   Widening type casting can occur automatically in Java.
-   `String` values can be converted to an `int` using the `parseInt()` method from the `Integer` class.
-   An `int` value can be converted into a `String` using the `valueOf()` method from the `String` class.

### Multiple Choice Question

What will the following program output?

```java
String x = "9";
System.out.println((double)(Integer.parseInt(x)/3));
```

**Answer**: `3.0`  
**Explanation**: We convert the `String` value `"9"` to an `int`, divide the `int` value by `3`, and then convert the value to a `double`.
