# Math Magic Project

## Objective

Study for the AP Computer Science A Exam (Java) by creating a small program that performs a mathematical magic trick. This project involves performing arithmetic operations on an integer of your choice to achieve a surprising result.

The instructions provided are general guidelines. Upon completion of the project, feel free to explore the code on your own.

## Project Description

In this project, you will write a program that takes an initial number and performs a series of arithmetic operations to always result in the same final value, demonstrating a mathematical trick. Let's begin by setting up the necessary variables and steps.

## Tasks

### 1. Initialize the Original Number

Create an `int` variable called `myNumber` and set it equal to any integer other than 0. For this code to work properly, `myNumber` must be between -46,341 and 46,340 to avoid integer overflow.

> Hint
> To declare and initialize:
>
> ```java
> int myNumber = 2;
> ```
>
> Remember that the semicolon `;` is used to end Java statements.

### 2. Document the Original Number

We will refer to `myNumber` as the original number from now on. Write a comment in the program that documents this to help other programmers understand its purpose.

> Hint
> Single line comments are one line comments that begin with two forward slashes:
>
> ```java
> // I'm a single line comment!
> ```
>
> It would be helpful to let other programmers know that `myNumber` is the original number:
>
> ```java
> // myNumber is the original number
> ```

### 3. Step One: Square the Number

Create an `int` variable called `stepOne` and set it equal to the original number (`myNumber`) multiplied by itself.

> Hint
> Suppose you want to create an `int` variable called `tons` and set it equal to 4 × 4, you would write:
>
> ```java
> int tons = 4 * 4;
> ```

### 4. Step Two: Add the Original Number

Create an `int` variable called `stepTwo` and set it equal to the previous result (`stepOne`) plus the original number (`myNumber`).

> Hint
> Suppose you want to create an `int` variable called `two` and set it equal to 1 + 1, you would write:
>
> ```java
> int two = 1 + 1;
> ```

### 5. Step Three: Divide by Original Number

Create an `int` variable called `stepThree` and set it equal to the previous result (`stepTwo`) divided by the original number.

> Hint
> To perform a division, use the forward slash `/`:
>
> ```java
> int quotient = 45 / 3;
> ```

### 6. Step Four: Add 17

Create an `int` variable called `stepFour` and set it equal to the previous result (`stepThree`) plus `17`.

### 7. Step Five: Subtract the Original Number

Create an `int` variable called `stepFive` and set it equal to the previous result (`stepFour`) minus the original number.

> Hint
> To perform a subtraction, use the `-`:
>
> ```java
> int subtraction = 20 - 15;
> ```

### 8. Step Six: Divide by 6

Create an `int` variable called `stepSix` and set it equal to the previous result (`stepFive`) divided by `6`.

### 9. Print the Result

Print out the value of the last step. Then, save and run your code. What number is printed to the console?

> Hint
>
> ```java
> System.out.println(stepSix);
> ```

### 10. Test with Another Number

Now, go back to your code and change `myNumber` to any other integer within the range -46,341 to 46,340. Run your program again. Is the output the same? It's math magic!

**Note**: Due to the range of the `int` primitive data type, only set `myNumber` to integer values between -46,341 and 46,340 (both inclusive). Values outside of this range for `myNumber` will cause the value of `stepOne` to exceed the maximum possible value of `int` when we multiply `myNumber` by itself, which can cause the program to produce unexpected results!

> Hint
> `3` will be printed to the console no matter what integer you choose as the original number! Want to know why? Suppose `myNumber` is x:
>
> **( ( ( x² + x ) / x ) + 17 - x ) / 6**  
> **= ( ( x + 1 ) + 17 - x ) / 6**  
> **= ( x + 18 - x ) / 6**  
> **= 18 / 6**  
> **= 3**

### 11. Challenge: Use Only Two Variables

Recreate this project using only two variables: `myNumber` and `magicNumber`. Use your understanding of compound assignment operators to recreate the above program by only manipulating `magicNumber`.

> Hint
> Here are the steps for accomplishing this task:
>
> -   First, create the `myNumber` variable and set it equal to any number that is not `0`:
>
>     ```java
>     int myNumber = 15; // Can be any number
>     ```
>
> -   Then, declare a variable called `magicNumber` and initialize it to have the value `myNumber * myNumber`:
>
>     ```java
>     int magicNumber = myNumber * myNumber;
>     ```
>
> -   Next, use the `+=` compound assignment operator to increase the value of `magicNumber` by `myNumber`:
>
>     ```java
>     magicNumber += myNumber;
>     ```
>
> -   Use `/=` to divide `magicNumber` by `myNumber`:
>
>     ```java
>     magicNumber /= myNumber;
>     ```
>
> -   Use `+=` to increase `magicNumber` by `17`:
>
>     ```java
>     magicNumber += 17;
>     ```
>
> -   Decrease `magicNumber` by `myNumber` using `-=`:
>
>     ```java
>     magicNumber -= myNumber;
>     ```
>
> -   Then, use `/=` to divide `magicNumber` by `6`:
>
>     ```java
>     magicNumber /= 6;
>     ```
>
> -   Finally, print the value of `magicNumber` to check that your program works correctly!

## Code Example

```java
public class Magic {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int myNumber = 15; // Can be any number
        // myNumber is the original number

        // Use only two variables
        int magicNumber = myNumber * myNumber;
        magicNumber += myNumber;
        magicNumber /= myNumber;
        magicNumber += 17;
        magicNumber -= myNumber;
        magicNumber /= 6;
        System.out.println(magicNumber);
    }
}
```

## Output

```
3
```
