# Arrays and ArrayLists | Codecademy

# Desert Island Playlist

## Project Brief

### Objective

Study for the AP Computer Science A Exam (Java)

### Desert Island Playlist

Suppose you’re heading to a desert island, cut off from the world, for the next few days. Luckily, you can bring a playlist of your favorite music ♪♪.

Also, this is a chance to put your hard-earned Java skills to the test.

You will build Playlist.java, to store the best possible music playlist using Java `Arrays` and `ArrayList`.

You’ll add your favorite songs and use different functions on `ArrayList` and `Arrays` to customize the playlist.

Let’s build it now!

### Tasks

15/15 complete

Mark the tasks as complete by checking them off

## Create Your Playlist

1.

We’ve created a file for you called **Playlist.java**

-   Add a `main()` method to the `Playlist` class in the **Playlist.java** file.
-   Import `Arrays` and `ArrayList` from `java.util` in **Playlist.java** since we’re working with them.

Hint

For example, if we need to import `LinkedList` from `java.util`, we would write:

```
import java.util.LinkedList;
```

2.

Inside `main()` of the **Playlist.java** file, create an array `favoriteSongs` that can hold `String` values and initialize it with your 10 favorite songs.

Each element of the array should be a string in this format “Artist - Song Title”. For example:

```
"Queen - Bohemian Rhapsody"
```

Hint

Here, we create an Array called `favoriteDogs` of type String that holds 10 different dog breeds:

```
String[] favoriteDogs = {"Maltese", "Cavachon", "German Shepherd", "Beagle", "Poodle", "Bulldog", "Boxer", "Siberian Husky", "Dachshund", "Shih Tzu"};
```

3.

Print the first three songs in your `favoriteSongs` array.

Hint

Here is an example of how we can access and print elements of an array:

```
// print first element of someArraySystem.out.println(someArray[0]);
```

4.

Add an `ArrayList` called `desertIslandPlaylist` to store `String` values.

Hint

Here, we create an ArrayList called `dogNames` of type `String` that holds 10 different dog breeds:

```
ArrayList<String> dogNames = new ArrayList<>();
```

5.

Let’s add some songs to our `desertIslandPlaylist`!

Use the

Preview: Docs Adds an element to an ArrayList.

[`add()`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/array-list/add)

method of the `ArrayList` class to add 5 of your favorite songs to `desertIslandPlaylist`.

> Remember to add songs that are not present in the `favoriteSongs` array.

Hint

For example, if we wanted to add “Daisy” in `ArrayList` `dogNames`, we would do it like so:

```
dogNames.add("Daisy");
```

6.

Print `desertIslandPlaylist` to the terminal.

Run the code and see what your playlist looks like!

Hint

Let’s look at an example of how we would print `dogNames`:

```
System.out.println(dogNames);
```

To run `Dog.java` in the terminal, we would type this command in the terminal:

```
java Dog
```

## Add and Remove Songs

7.

You have two lists of songs.

You want to hear your favorite songs if you get stuck on a desert island, right?

Add all the songs from `favoriteSongs` to `desertIslandPlaylist`:

-   Use `Arrays.asList()` method and pass the `favoriteSongs` Array to convert it into a list.
-   Add this list to `desertIslandPlaylist` using the

    Preview: Docs Adds a collection to an ArrayList.

    [`addAll()`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/array-list/addAll)

    method.

Hint

For example, this is how we can add all the breeds from the array `favoriteDogs` to ArrayList `dogsNames` like so:

```
dogNames.addAll(Arrays.asList(favoriteDogs));
```

8.

Yikes! It turns out you can only bring five songs now. You’ll need to make some tough decisions and remove some of the songs from `desertIslandPlaylist`.

You need to check how many songs does `desertIslandPlaylist` `ArrayList` contains.

Use the

Preview: Docs Returns the number of elements in the ArrayList.

[`size()`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/array-list/size)

method to get the number of songs on your playlist and print it to the terminal.

Hint

Check out this example where we get the size of an `ArrayList` called `dogNames`:

```
dogNames.size();
```

9.

Now, to keep your top 5 favorite songs in the playlist, remove the rest of your least favorite songs.

Use the

Preview: Docs Removes a specified element from an ArrayList.

[`remove()`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/array-list/remove)

method to remove songs until you only have 10 songs left.

Hint

Here, we remove the dog breed “Golden Retriever” from `dogNames()`:

```
dogNames.remove("Golden Retriever");
```

## Swap Songs

10.

The playlist seems a little boring. Let’s change the `ArrayList` by swapping some of the songs.

Before we get started, Run the code.

The code will print the `desertIslandPlaylist` `ArrayList` which contains your top 5 favorite songs.

Hint

No need to change anything in the code here.

11.

Select two songs and get their indices using the

Preview: Docs Returns the index of the first occurrence of a given element, or -1 if not found.

[`indexOf()`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/array-list/indexOf)

method. Let’s call these songs `Song A` and `Song B` and store their indices inside these variables.

Hint

Check out this example where we get the index of the “Golden Retriever” in the `dogNames` ArrayList and store it in the variable `indexD`:

```
int indexD = dogNames.indexOf("Golden Retriever");
```

12.

Now, create a `String` variable called `tempA` and assign it with the value of “Song A”.

Hint

Here we create a String variable called `tempBreed` and assign it the value of “Border Collie”:

```
String tempBreed = "Border Collie";
```

13.

Replace Song A with Song B by using the `set()` method on `desertIslandPlaylist` to replace Song A with Song B.

Print the `ArrayList` `desertIslandPlaylist` and run the code. Song B should appear twice in the playlist now.

Stuck? Get a hint

14.

Let’s complete the second step of our swap.

Call `set()` on `desertIslandPlaylist` again with the index of Song B and the temporary String variable you created `tempA`.

With this, you’re putting Song A where Song B used to be because variable `tempA` has the value of Song A stored.

Now, Print the playlist to see the songs swapped from their original positions.

Stuck? Get a hint

## Remix!

15.

Well done! You’ve successfully built your desert island playlist using arrays and `ArrayList`s!

Here’s one possible solution.

Want to try something else? Check the hint for ideas:

-   Build another desert island playlist for food recipes, movies, or TV shows.
-   Create a method that shuffles the song order.
-   Reverse the song order.

### Code Review

Get targeted feedback about your code and how well it meets the objective of the project.You can request 1 AI-powered review per project when you complete all tasks.Request code review

## Code Editor

Playlist.java

Playlist.java

Fullscreen Code Editor

Enter Fullscreen Code Editor

```java
import java.util.Arrays;
import java.util.ArrayList;

class Playlist {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    String[] favoriteSongs = {
        "The Beatles - Hey Jude",
        "Queen - Bohemian Rhapsody",
        "Led Zeppelin - Stairway to Heaven",
        "Pink Floyd - Comfortably Numb",
        "Michael Jackson - Billie Jean",
        "Nirvana - Smells Like Teen Spirit",
        "Bob Dylan - Like a Rolling Stone",
        "Radiohead - Paranoid Android",
        "David Bowie - Space Oddity",
        "Fleetwood Mac - Dreams"
    };

    // Task3: print first three songs
    System.out.println(favoriteSongs[0]);
    System.out.println(favoriteSongs[1]);
    System.out.println(favoriteSongs[2]);

    ArrayList<String> desertIslandPlaylist = new ArrayList<>();
    desertIslandPlaylist.add("Daft Punk - Get Lucky");
    desertIslandPlaylist.add("The Weeknd - Blinding Lights");
    desertIslandPlaylist.add("Tame Impala - The Less I Know The Better");
    desertIslandPlaylist.add("Arctic Monkeys - Do I Wanna Know?");
    desertIslandPlaylist.add("Kendrick Lamar - HUMBLE.");


    System.out.println(desertIslandPlaylist);

    desertIslandPlaylist.addAll(Arrays.asList(favoriteSongs));

    System.out.println(desertIslandPlaylist.size());


  }
}
```

TODO: 这份 Project 并未完全完成，需要按照 task 一步一步完成。

ctrl + enter

ctrl + enter

SaveLoading Complete

Copy file

Reset Workspace (ctrl+g)

## Output-only Terminal

Output:

The Beatles - Hey Jude
Queen - Bohemian Rhapsody
Led Zeppelin - Stairway to Heaven
\[Daft Punk - Get Lucky, The Weeknd - Blinding Lights, Tame Impala - The Less I Know The Better, Arctic Monkeys - Do I Wanna Know?, Kendrick Lamar - HUMBLE.\]



## Embedded Content
