# Welcome to the AP Computer Science Exam | Codecademy

# Welcome to the AP Computer Science Exam

Welcome to the AP Computer Science path!

Welcome! In this skill path, you will learn all of the topics covered on the AP Computer Science A exam. The exam dives deep into Java — it’s a great entry point for people that have never programmed before. In fact, if you aren’t planning on taking the AP exam, this course can still be a useful resource! Think of this path as an equivalent experience to most introductory high school or college programming courses.

This path is broken into 8 sections:

-   Writing Your First Java Program: Learn the basics of Java, how to write your first program, and begin experimenting with creating variables.
-   Object-Oriented Programming: Everything in Java is a class! Learn how to start thinking in an object-oriented way by creating your own classes and objects. We’ll also look into some of Java’s most used built-in classes.
-   Conditionals and Control Flow: Learn how to make programs that can branch based on conditional logic using if statements.
-   A Deeper Dive Into Classes: We’ll take a deeper look at the String class. After that, we’ll investigate some of the more advanced features of classes and objects, like access, encapsulation, and scope.
-   Arrays and Loops: Learn how to create Arrays and ArrayLists. Then learn how to write loops so you can quickly access all of the data you store in those arrays. In this section, we’ll also look at two-dimensional arrays!
-   Code Challenges: At this point, you’ve learned a lot of Java! It’s time to put that knowledge to the test. Try solving some of our code challenges involving arrays, loops, Strings, and more!
-   Algorithms: What is an algorithm? How do we know if an algorithm is efficient? What is the difference between iterative and recursive algorithms? In this section, we’ll look into all of these questions by writing searching and sorting algorithms.
-   Inheritance and Polymorphism: We’ll close the course by looking at how all classes are related to each other through the concept of inheritance.

Good luck!
