# Inheritance and Polymorphism Quiz

## Question 1

Set up the class so that `Triceratops` inherits from `Dinosaur`.

### Code

```java
public class Triceratops extends Dinosaur {
    // additional class members go here
}
```

## Question 2

The parent class of `Sauropoda` requires that you pass a `String` called `size` into its constructor. Modify the constructor of `Sauropoda` so that all `Sauropoda` objects will be instantiated with a `size` of `"large"`.

### Code

```java
Sauropoda() {
    super("large");
}
```

## Question 3

Instantiate a `Stegosaurus` object as a `Dinosaur`.

### Code

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    Dinosaur steggy = new Stegosaurus();
}
```

## Question 4

Imagine you want to build three Java classes in your package — one parent class and two child classes. How many files will you need to create?

### Answer

Three.

Every Java class requires its own file. But only one will need a `main()` method.

## Question 5

Change `Dinosaur` so that only `Dinosaur`, its child classes, and the package it is in have access to the `weight` field.

### Code

```java
public class Dinosaur {
    protected double weight;
    public double getWeight() {
        return this.weight;
    }
}
```

## Question 6

Which is NOT a facet of polymorphism in Java?

### Answer Choices

-   A Java child class can override its parent's methods.
-   A Java class can inherit fields and methods from another class. (Correct answer)
-   It's possible to use objects of different classes that share a parent class together in an array or `ArrayList`.
-   You can use a child class object like a member of its parent class.

### Explanation

Inheriting fields and methods is not polymorphism. Using objects of different classes that share a parent class in an array or `ArrayList` is a part of polymorphism.
