# Conditionals and Control Flow

## Introduction to Control Flow

Imagine we’re writing a program that enrolls students in courses.

-   _If_ a student has completed the prerequisites, _then_ they can enroll in a course.
-   _Else_, they need to take the prerequisite courses.

They can’t take Physics II without finishing Physics I.

We represent this kind of decision-making in our program using

Preview: Docs Loading link description

[_conditional_](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/conditionals?page_ref=catalog)

or _control flow_ statements. Before this point, our code runs line-by-line from the top down, but conditional statements allow us to be selective in which portions will run.

Conditional statements check a

Preview: Docs Loading link description

[`boolean`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/boolean)

condition and run a _block_ of code depending on the condition. Curly braces mark the

Preview: Docs Loading link description

[scope](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/scope)

of a conditional block similar to a

Preview: Docs Loading link description

[method](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/method)

or class.

Here’s a complete conditional statement:

```java
if (true) {
  System.out.println("Hello World!");
}
```

If the condition is `true`, then the block is run. So `Hello World!` is printed.

But suppose the condition is different:

```java
if (false) {
  System.out.println("Hello World!");
}
```

If the condition is `false`, then the block does not run.

This code is also called _if-then_ statements: “If `(condition)` is `true`, then do something”.

## If-Then Statement

The _if-then_ statement is the most simple

Preview: Docs Loading link description

[control flow](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/control-flow)

we can write. It tests an expression for truth and executes some code based on it.

```java
if (flip == 1) {
  System.out.println("Heads!");
}
```

-   The `if` keyword marks the beginning of the conditional statement, followed by parentheses `()`.
-   The parentheses hold a

    Preview: Docs Loading link description

    [`boolean`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/boolean)

    datatype.

For the condition in parentheses we can also use

Preview: Docs Stores data that can be manipulated and referenced throughout the code.

[variables](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/julia/variables)

that reference a boolean, or comparisons that evaluate to a boolean.

The boolean condition is followed by opening and closing curly braces that mark a block of code. This block runs if, and only if, the boolean is `true`.

```java
boolean isValidPassword = true;
if (isValidPassword) {
  System.out.println("Password accepted!");
}
// Prints "Password accepted!"
int numberOfItemsInCart = 9;
if (numberOfItemsInCart > 12) {
  System.out.println("Express checkout not available");
}
// Nothing is printed.
```

If a conditional is brief we can omit the curly braces entirely:

```java
if (true) System.out.println("Brevity is the soul of wit");
```

**Note:** Conditional statements do not end in a semicolon.

**Instructions**

1. Write an `if-then` statement that prints `High value item!` when `itemCost` is greater than `24.00`.

    > Hint
    >
    > Here’s the general structure:
    >
    > ```java
    > if (condition) {
    >   // Do something
    > }
    > ```

## If-Then-Else

We’ve seen how to conditionally execute one block of code, but what if there are two possible blocks of code we’d like to execute?

Let’s say _if_ a student has the required prerequisite, _then_ they enroll in the selected course, _else_ they’re enrolled in the prerequisite course instead.

We create an alternate conditional branch with the `else` keyword:

```java
if (hasPrerequisite) {
  // Enroll in course
} else {
  // Enroll in prerequisite
}
```

This conditional statement ensures that exactly one code block will be run. If the condition, `hasPrerequisite`, is `false`, the block after `else` runs.

There are now two separate code blocks in our conditional statement. The first block runs if the condition evaluates to `true`, the second block runs if the condition evaluates to `false`.

This code is also called an _if-then-else_ statement:

-   If _condition_ is true, then do something.
-   Else, do a different thing.

**Instructions**

1. In the code editor, there is an `isFilled` value that represents whether the order is ready to ship. Write an if-then-else statement that:

    - When `isFilled` is `true`, print `Shipping`.
    - When `isFilled` is `false`, print `Order not ready`.

    > Hint
    >
    > Here’s the structure of an `if-then-else` conditional statement:
    >
    > ```java
    > if (condition) {
    >   // Do one thing
    > } else {
    >   // Do another thing
    > }
    > ```

## If-Then-Else-If

The conditional structure we’ve learned can be chained together to check as many conditions as are required by our program.

Imagine our program is now selecting the appropriate course for a student. We’ll check their submission to find the correct course enrollment.

The conditional statement now has multiple conditions that are evaluated from the top down:

```java
String course = "Theatre";
if (course.equals("Biology")) {
  // Enroll in Biology course
} else if (course.equals("Algebra")) {
  // Enroll in Algebra course
} else if (course.equals("Theatre")) {
  // Enroll in Theatre course
} else {
  System.out.println("Course not found!");
}
```

**The first** condition to evaluate to `true` will have that code block run. Here’s an example demonstrating the order:

```java
int testScore = 72;
if (testScore >= 90) {
  System.out.println("A");
} else if (testScore >= 80) {
  System.out.println("B");
} else if (testScore >= 70) {
  System.out.println("C");
} else if (testScore >= 60) {
  System.out.println("D");
} else {
  System.out.println("F");
}
// prints: C
```

This chained conditional statement has two conditions that evaluate `true`. Because `testScore >= 70` comes before `testScore >= 60`, only the earlier code block is run.

**Note:** Only one of the code blocks will run.

**Instructions**

1. We need to calculate the shipping costs for our orders. There’s a new instance field, `String shipping`, that we use to calculate the cost. Use a chained `if-then-else` to check for different values within the `calculateShipping()` method:

    - When the `shipping` instance field equals `"Regular"`, the method should return `0`.
    - When the `shipping` instance field equals `"Express"`, the method should return `1.75`.
    - Else the method should return `.50`.

    > Hint
    >
    > Here’s the general structure of `if-then-else-if`:
    >
    > ```java
    > if (condition) {
    >   // Do something
    > } else if (differentCondition) {
    >   // Do something else
    > } else {
    >   // Do ANOTHER something else
    > }
    > ```
    >
    > The `shipping` instance field is a `String` so we’ll need to use `equals()` for our condition. Here’s how we’d write a simple `if-then`:
    >
    > ```java
    > if (shipping.equals("Coolest beans")) {
    >   // equals() returned true!
    > }
    > ```

## Nested Conditional Statements

We can create more complex conditional structures by creating _nested conditional statements_, which is created by placing conditional statements inside other conditional statements:

```java
if (outer condition) {
  if (nested condition) {
    // Instruction to execute if both conditions are true
  }
}
```

When we implement nested conditional statements, the outer statement is evaluated first. If the outer condition is `true`, then the inner, nested statement is evaluated.

Let’s create a program that helps us decide what to wear based on the weather:

```java
int temp = 45;
boolean raining = true;
if (temp < 60) {
  System.out.println("Wear a jacket!");
  if (raining == true) {
    System.out.println("Bring your umbrella.");
  } else {
    System.out.println("Leave your umbrella home.");
  }
}
```

In the code snippet above, our compiler will check the condition in the first `if-then` statement: `temp < 60`. Since `temp` has a value of `45`, this condition is `true`; therefore, our program will print `Wear a jacket!`.

Then, we’ll evaluate the condition of the nested `if-then` statement: `raining == true`. This condition is also `true`, so `Bring your umbrella` is also printed to the screen.

Note that, if the first condition was `false`, the nested condition would not be evaluated.

**Instructions**

1. The company offers a temporary deal that, if the consumer uses the coupon `"ship50"`, the company will reduce the express shipping price. Let’s rewrite the body of `else-if` statement from the last exercise. Inside the `else-if` statement, create a nested `if-then` statement that checks if `couponCode` equals `"ship50"`:

    - If the nested condition is `true`, return the value `.85`.
    - If the condition is `false`, use a nested `else` statement to return the value `1.75`.

    > Hint
    >
    > The solution should look similar to the example below:
    >
    > ```java
    > public double calculateShipping() {
    >   if (shipping.equals("Regular")) {
    >     return 0;
    >   } else if (shipping.equals("Express")) {
    >     // Add your code here
    >     if (couponCode.equals("couponCodeValue")) {
    >       // return discounted shipping value
    >     } else {
    >       // return full shipping value
    >     }
    >   } else {
    >     return .50;
    >   }
    > }
    > ```

## Switch Statement

An alternative to chaining if-then-else conditions together is to use the [`switch`](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/switch?page_ref=catalog) statement. This conditional will check a given value against any number of conditions and run the code block where there is a match.

Here’s an example of our course selection conditional as a `switch` statement instead:

```java
String course = "History";
switch (course) {
  case "Algebra":
    // Enroll in Algebra
    break;
  case "Biology":
    // Enroll in Biology
    break;
  case "History":
    // Enroll in History
    break;
  case "Theatre":
    // Enroll in Theatre
    break;
  default:
    System.out.println("Course not found");
}
```

This example enrolls the student in History class by checking the value contained in the parentheses, `course`, against each of the `case` labels. If the value after the case label matches the value within the parentheses, the _switch block_ is run.

In the above example, `course` references the [string](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/string) `"History"`, which matches `case "History":`.

When no value matches, the `default` block runs. Think of this as the `else` equivalent.

Switch blocks are different than other code blocks because they are not marked by curly braces and we use the `break` keyword to exit the switch statement.

Without `break`, code below the matching `case` label is run, _including code under other case labels_, which is rarely the desired behavior.

```java
String course = "Biology";
switch (course) {
  case "Algebra":
    // Enroll in Algebra
  case "Biology":
    // Enroll in Biology
  case "History":
    // Enroll in History
  case "Theatre":
    // Enroll in Theatre
  default:
    System.out.println("Course not found");
}
// enrolls student in Biology... AND History and Theatre!
```

**Instructions**

1. We’ll rewrite the `calculateShipping()` method so it uses a `switch` statement instead. There’s an uninitialized variable `shippingCost` in `calculateShipping()`. Assign the correct value to `shippingCost` using a `switch` statement:

    - Check the value of the instance field `shipping`.
    - When `shipping` matches `"Regular"`, `shippingCost` should be `0`.
    - When `shipping` matches `"Express"`, `shippingCost` should be `1.75`.
    - The default should assign `.50` to `shippingCost`.
    - **Make sure the method returns `shippingCost` after the `switch` statement.**

    > Hint
    >
    > Here’s the general structure of a `switch` statement:
    >
    > ```java
    > switch (value) {
    >   case possibleMatchingValue:
    >     // do something
    >     break;
    >   case anotherPossibleMatching:
    >     // do another thing
    >     break;
    >   default:
    >     // do this if nothing else matched
    > }
    > ```
    >
    > We want to assign the correct value inside the matching `case`:
    >
    > ```java
    > case "Regular":
    >   shippingCost = 0;
    >   break;
    > ```

## Review

Before this lesson, our code executed from top to bottom, line by line.

Conditional statements add branching paths to our programs. We use [conditionals](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/conditionals) to make decisions in the program so that different inputs will produce different results.

Conditionals have the general structure:

```java
if (condition) {
  // consequent path
} else {
  // alternative path
}
```

Specific conditional statements have the following behavior:

-   `if-then`:
    -   code block runs if condition is true
-   `if-then-else`:
    -   one block runs if conditions is true
    -   another block runs if condition is false
-   `if-then-else` chained:
    -   same as `if-then` but an arbitrary number of conditions
-   `switch`:
    -   switch block runs if condition value matches `case` value

**Instructions**

1. Our complete `Order` program is available, but the `main()` method is empty. Create different `Order` instances and see if you can run the code in all the different conditional blocks!
