# Conditionals and Control Flow

## Introduction to Conditional Operators

Java includes operators that only use [boolean](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/boolean) values. These _conditional operators_ help simplify expressions containing complex boolean relationships by reducing multiple boolean values to a single value: `true` or `false`.

For example, what if we want to run a code block only if _multiple_ conditions are true. We could use the _AND_ operator: `&&`.

Or, we want to run a code block if _at least one_ of two conditions are `true`. We could use the _OR_ operator: `||`.

Finally, we can produce the opposite value, where `true` becomes `false` and `false` becomes `true`, with the _NOT_ operator: `!`.

Understanding these complex relationships can feel overwhelming at first. Luckily, _truth tables_, like the ones seen to the right, can assist us in determining the relationship between two boolean-based conditions.

In this lesson, we’ll explore each of these conditional operators to see how they can be implemented into our conditional statements.

**Note**: The `Reservation` class will be built in this lesson. Note the different conditional statements and operators used to control the execution of the program.

![Three truth tables are displayed: AND, OR, and NOT. Each truth table is divided into three columns. The first column shows the true or false value of 'a'. The second column shows the true or false value of 'b'. The third column shows a true or false value that represents the relationship between 'a' and 'b'.](https://content.codecademy.com/courses/learn-java/AP-Computer-Science-A/conditional-operators/TruthTable-All.svg)

## Conditional-And: &&

Let’s return to our student enrollment program. We’ve added an additional requirement: not only must students have the prerequisite, but their tuition must be paid up as well. We have _two_ conditions that must be `true` before we enroll the student.

Here’s one way we could write the code:

```java
if (tuitionPaid) {
  if (hasPrerequisite) {
    // enroll student
  }
}
```

We’ve nested two `if-then` statements. This does the job but we can be more concise with the _AND_ operator:

```java
if (tuitionPaid && hasPrerequisite) {
  // enroll student
}
```

The AND operator, `&&`, is used between two [boolean](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/boolean) values and evaluates to a single boolean value. If the values **on both sides** are `true`, then the resulting value is `true`, otherwise the resulting value is `false`.

This code illustrates every combination:

```java
true && true  // true
false && true // false
true && false // false
false && false // false
```

**Instructions**

1. Our `Reservation` class has the method `confirmReservation()` which validates if a restaurant can accommodate a given reservation. We need to build the conditional logic into `confirmReservation()` using three instance variables:

    - `restaurantCapacity`
    - `guestCount`
    - `isRestaurantOpen`

    Use an `if-then-else` statement:

    - If `restaurantCapacity` is greater than or equal to `guestCount` **and** the restaurant is open, print `"Reservation confirmed"` and set `isConfirmed` to `true`.
    - `else` print `"Reservation denied"` and set `isConfirmed` to `false`.

    **Note:** For now, the `informUser()` method will always print `"Please enjoy your meal"` even if the reservation was not confirmed. We will modify this method in an upcoming exercise!

## Conditional-Or: ||

The requirements of our enrollment program have changed again. Certain courses have prerequisites that are satisfied by multiple courses. As long as students have taken **at least one** prerequisite, they should be allowed to enroll.

Here’s one way we could write the code:

```java
if (hasAlgebraPrerequisite) {
  // Enroll in course
}
if (hasGeometryPrerequisite) {
  // Enroll in course
}
```

We’re using two different `if-then` statements with **the same code block**. We can be more concise with the _OR_ operator:

```java
if (hasAlgebraPrerequisite || hasGeometryPrerequisite) {
  // Enroll in course
}
```

The OR operator, `||`, is used between two [boolean](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/boolean) values and evaluates to a single boolean value. If **either of the two values** is `true`, then the resulting value is `true`, otherwise the resulting value is `false`.

This code illustrates every combination:

```java
true || true   // true
false || true  // true
true || false  // true
false || false // false
```

**Keep Reading: AP Computer Science A Students**

On some occasions, the compiler can determine the truth value of a logical expression by only evaluating the first `boolean` operand; this is known as _short-circuited evaluation_. Short-circuited evaluation only works with expressions that use `&&` or `||`.

In an expression that uses `||`, the resulting value will be `true` as long as one of the operands has a `true` value. If the first operand of an expression is `true`, we don’t need to see what the value of the other operand is to know that the final value will also be `true`.

For example, we can run the following code without error despite dividing a number by `0` in the second operand because the first operand had a `true` value:

```java
if (1 > 0 || 2 / 0 == 7) {
  System.out.println("No errors here!");
}
```

An expression that uses `&&` will only result in `true` if both operands are `true`. If the first operand in the expression is `false`, the entire value will be `false`.

**Instructions**

1. Let’s write a message inside the `Reservation()` constructor that warns against bad input. Our restaurants can’t seat parties of more than `8` people, and we don’t want reservations for `0` or less because that would be silly. Inside `Reservation()`, write a conditional that uses `||`:

    - If `count` is less than `1` **OR** greater than `8`, write the following message: `Invalid reservation!`.

    > Hint
    >
    > The conditional-OR, `||`, evaluates to `true` if **at least one** of the values are `true`. We can use it in a conditional statement like so:
    >
    > ```java
    > boolean lightGreen = false;
    > boolean lightYellow = true;
    > if (lightGreen || lightYellow) {
    >   System.out.println("You may pass");
    > }
    > ```
    >
    > This code snippet will print `You may pass` because one of the two booleans, `lightYellow`, is `true`.

## Logical NOT: !

The _unary_ operator NOT, `!`, works on a **single** value. This operator evaluates to the opposite [boolean](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/boolean) to which it’s applied:

```java
!false // true
!true  // false
```

NOT is useful for expressing our intent clearly in programs. For example, sometimes we need the opposite behavior of an `if-then`: run a code block **only if** the condition is `false`.

```java
boolean hasPrerequisite = false;
if (hasPrerequisite) {
  // do nothing
} else {
  System.out.println("Must complete prerequisite course!");
}
```

This code does what we want but it’s strange to have a code block that does nothing!

The logical NOT operator cleans up our example:

```java
boolean hasPrerequisite = false;
if (!hasPrerequisite) {
  System.out.println("Must complete prerequisite course!");
}
```

We can write a succinct conditional statement without an empty code block.

**Instructions**

1. Let’s make `informUser()` more informative. If their reservation is not confirmed, they should know! Write an `if-then-else` statement and use `!` with `isConfirmed` as the condition:

    - If their reservation is **not** confirmed, write `Unable to confirm reservation, please contact restaurant.`
    - Else write: `Please enjoy your meal!`

    > Hint
    >
    > The _NOT_ operator flips the boolean value to which it is applied. This helps make code more meaningful:
    >
    > ```java
    > boolean doorIsLocked = false;
    > if (!doorIsLocked) {
    >   System.out.println("Come on in!");
    > }
    > ```
    >
    > This code snippet will print `Come on in!` because the `false` value is flipped to `true` by `!`.

## Combining Conditional Operators

We have the ability to expand our [boolean](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/boolean) expressions by using multiple conditional operators in a single expression.

For example:

```java
boolean foo = true && !(false || !true)
```

How does an expression like this get evaluated by the compiler? The order of evaluation when it comes to conditional operators is as follows:

1.  Conditions placed in parentheses - `()`
2.  NOT - `!`
3.  AND - `&&`
4.  OR - `||`

Using this information, let’s dissect the expression above to find the value of `foo`:

```java
true && !(false || !true)
```

First, we’ll evaluate `(false || !true`) because it is enclosed within parentheses. Following the order of evaluation, we will evaluate `!true`, which equals `false`:

```java
true && !(false || false)
```

Then, we’ll evaluate `(false || false)` which equals `false`. Now our expression looks like this:

```java
true && !false
```

Next, we’ll evaluate `!false` because it uses the NOT operator. This expression equals `true` making our expression the following:

```java
true && true
```

`true && true` evaluates to `true`; therefore, the value of `foo` is `true`.

**Instructions**

1. Take a look at the three expressions in **Operators.java**. Using your understanding of the order of execution, find out whether the value of each expression is `true` or `false`. When you’re ready, uncomment the print statements to find out if you are right.

## Review

Conditional operators work on [boolean](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/data-types/boolean) values to simplify our code. They’re often combined with conditional statements to consolidate the branching logic.

Conditional-AND, `&&`, evaluates to `true` if the booleans on _both sides_ are `true`.

```java
if (true && false) {
  System.out.println("You won't see me print!");
} else if (true && true) {
  System.out.println("You will see me print!");
}
```

Conditional-OR, `||`, evaluates to `true` if one or both of the booleans on either side is `true`.

```java
if (false || false) {
  System.out.println("You won't see me print!");
} else if (false || true) {
  System.out.println("You will see me print!");
}
```

Logical-NOT, `!`, evaluates to the opposite boolean value to which it is applied.

```java
if (!false) {
  System.out.println("You will see me print!");
}
```

**Instructions**

1. The complete `Reservation` class is available. Play around inside `main()` and see if you can create instances that will run every possible conditional branch.
