# Conditionals and Control Flow | Codecademy

# A Simple Car Loan Payment Calculator

## Project Brief

### Objective

Study for the AP Computer Science A Exam (Java)

### A Simple Car Loan Payment Calculator

Let’s combine a few of the concepts that you have learned so far: conditionals, Boolean expressions, and arithmetic expressions.

In this project, you will write a program that will calculate the _monthly_ car payment a user should expect to make after taking out a car loan. The program will include the following:

-   Car loan amount
-   Interest rate of the loan
-   Length of the loan (in years)
-   Down payment

The instructions provided are general guidelines. Upon completion of the project, feel free to add functionality of your own.

If you get stuck during this project or would like to see an experienced developer work through it, click “**Get Unstuck**“ to see a **project walkthrough video**.

### Tasks

16/16 complete

Mark the tasks as complete by checking them off

## Car Loan Payment Calculator

1.

Create an `int` variable called `carLoan` and set it equal to `10000`.

2.

Next, create an `int` variable called `loanLength` and set it equal to `3`. This will represent a loan length of 3 years.

3.

Now create an `int` variable called `interestRate` and set it equal to `5`. This will represent an interest rate of 5% on the loan.

4.

Next, create an `int` variable called `downPayment` and set it equal `2000`. This will represent the down payment provided by a user for this car purchase.

5.

Let’s build in some requirements that would prevent a buyer from taking out an invalid car loan. Write an `if` statement that checks whether the loan length is less than or equal to zero `or` whether the interest rate is less than or equal to zero.

6.

Next, inside of the `if` statement, print out a helpful error message to the user. For example, you can print out something like: `Error! You must take out a valid car loan.`

7.

What if the down payment is more than the price of the car? Add to the `if` statement and use `else if` to check whether the down payment is greater than or equal to the car loan.

8.

Inside of the `else if` block, print out a helpful message to the user about the down payment and car loan amounts. For example, you can print out something like: `The car can be paid in full.`

9.

Finally, if none of the previous Boolean expressions evaluate to `true`, calculate the monthly payment in an `else` block.

10.

Inside of the `else` block, create an `int` variable called `remainingBalance` and set it equal to `carLoan` minus `downPayment`.

11.

Since we need the _monthly_ payment, we must convert the loan length from years to months. On the next line, create an `int` variable called `months` and set it equal to `loanLength` times `12`.

12.

Create an `int` variable called `monthlyBalance` and set it equal to `remainingBalance` divided by `months`. This represents the monthly payment _without_ interest included.

13.

The user needs to pay interest on the loan borrowed. Create an `int` variable called `interest` and set it equal to the monthly balance times the interest rate, divided all by 100.

14.

Calculate the final monthly payment. Create an `int` variable called `monthlyPayment` and set it equal to the monthly balance plus the interest.

15.

On the next line, print out the monthly payment. If you correctly completed this project, the console should print out `233` as the monthly payment.

16.

Add comments near the top of the program that describe what the program does.

### Code Review

Get targeted feedback about your code and how well it meets the objective of the project.You can request 1 AI-powered review per project when you complete all tasks.Request code review

## Code Editor

CarLoan.java

Fullscreen Code Editor

Enter Fullscreen Code Editor

```java
public class CarLoan {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
    int carLoan = 10000;
    int loanLength = 3;
    int interestRate = 5;
    int downPayment = 2000;

    if (loanLength <= 0 || interestRate <= 0) {
      System.out.println("Error! You must take out a valid car loan.");
    } else if (downPayment >= carLoan) {
      System.out.println("The car can be paid in full.");
    } else {
      int remainingBalance = carLoan - downPayment;
      int months = loanLength * 12;
      int monthlyBalance = remainingBalance / months;
      int interest = monthlyBalance * interestRate / 100;
      int monthlyPayment = interest + monthlyBalance;
      System.out.println(monthlyPayment);
    }
	}
}
```

ctrl + enter

ctrl + enter

SaveLoading Complete

Copy file

Reset Workspace (ctrl+g)

## Output-only Terminal

Output:

233

## Embedded Content
