# Conditionals and Control Flow | Codecademy

# Continents and Cities

## Project Brief

### Objective

Study for the AP Computer Science A Exam (Java)

### Continents and Cities

Planet Earth is a magical place. Let’s practice the Java switch statement that you learned about.

Write a **Continents.java** program that will print out a continent and the largest city in that continent, based on the value of an integer.

The instructions provided are general guidelines. Upon completion of the project, feel free to add functionality of your own.

If you get stuck during this project or would like to see an experienced developer work through it, click **Get Unstuck** to see a project walkthrough.

### Tasks

16/16 complete

Mark the tasks as complete by checking them off

## Setting up:

1.

Let’s create a skeleton for the program. Add:

```
public class Continents {  public static void main(String[] args) {      }}
```

Hint

The `main()` is the main function that houses your program.

2.

Write a comment near the top of the program that describe what the program does.

Hint

```
// Continents and their largest cities.
```

3.

Create an `int` variable called `continent` and set it equal to `4`.

Hint

```
int continent = 4;
```

## Write a switch statement:

4.

Create a `switch` statement that will switch based on the value of `continent`.

Hint

```
switch (continent) {      }
```

5.

Inside of the switch statement, add a `case` that will run when the value of `continent` is `1`.

6.

When the value of `continent` is `1`, print out `North America: Mexico City, Mexico`.

7.

Make sure the next line exits out of the case.

8.

Add another `case` that will run when the value of `continent` is `2`. When this value is met, print out `South America: Sao Paulo, Brazil`.

9.

Make sure the next line exits out of the case.

10.

Add another `case` that will run when the value of `continent` is `3`. When this value is met, print out `Europe: Moscow, Russia`. Make sure the next line exits out of the case.

11.

Add another `case` that will run when the value of `continent` is `4`. When this value is met, print out `Africa: Lagos, Nigeria`. Make sure the next line exits out of the case.

12.

Add another `case` that will run when the value of `continent` is `5`. When this value is met, print out `Asia: Shanghai, China`. Make sure the next line exits out of the case.

13.

Add another `case` that will run when the value of `continent` is `6`. When this value is met, print out `Australia: Sydney, Australia`. Make sure the next line exits out of the case.

14.

Add another `case` that will run when the value of `continent` is `7`. When this value is met, print out `Antarctica: McMurdo Station, US`. Make sure the next line exits out of the case.

15.

Finally, add the `default` case. The `default` case should print out `Undefined continent!` Make sure the next line exits out of the case.

16.

If the program is written correctly, your output should be `Africa: Lagos, Nigeria`. Great work!

### Code Review

Get targeted feedback about your code and how well it meets the objective of the project.You can request 1 AI-powered review per project when you complete all tasks.Request code review

## Code Editor

Continents.java

Fullscreen Code Editor

Enter Fullscreen Code Editor

```java
/*
Continents.java program that will print out a continent and the largest city in that continent, based on the value of an integer.
*/

public class Continents {

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int continent = 4;

    switch (continent) {
      case 1:
        System.out.println("North America: Mexico City, Mexico");
        break;
      case 2:
        System.out.println("South America: Sao Paulo, Brazil");
        break;
      case 3:
        System.out.println("Europe: Moscow, Russia");
        break;
      case 4:
        System.out.println("Africa: Lagos, Nigeria");
        break;
      case 5:
        System.out.println("Asia: Shanghai, China");
        break;
      case 6:
        System.out.println("Australia: Sydney, Australia");
        break;
      case 7:
        System.out.println("Antarctica: McMurdo Station, US");
        break;
      default:
        System.out.println("Undefined continent!");
    }


  }

}

```

ctrl + enter

ctrl + enter

SaveLoading Complete

Copy file

Reset Workspace (ctrl+g)

## Output-only Terminal

Output:

Africa: Lagos, Nigeria



## Embedded Content

---
