# Java Code Challenge: Loops Involving Array Traversal

Try some code challenges involving loops and Arrays.

Loops are incredibly powerful when used together with arrays. If you need to do things like calculate a result or perform the same action on all elements of the array, you can use loops to prevent writing the same code for every element. For example, say my friend wrote the following grocery list for you:

```java
String[] groceries = new String[] {"candy corn", "chocolate", "jelly beans", "cookies"};
```

However, their handwriting is difficult to read, and you can only read it if it's written in capital letters. So we can use a loop to translate the grocery list into something you can read.

```java
String[] groceries = new String[] {"candy corn", "chocolate", "jelly beans", "cookies"};
for(String item : groceries) {
  System.out.println(item.toUpperCase());
}
```

Here, we set up a `for` loop to iterate through each element in the array of `groceries`. Inside the loop, we create a new string of all capitalized letters and print it out.

## 1. Total Cost for Groceries

### Questions

Your friend gave you a grocery list with a list of prices that correspond to each item in the grocery list. This is so you can make sure you have enough money to buy all the items.

Using a loop, update the `getTotalCost()` method to calculate the sum of all the `groceryPrices` and store the result in `totalCost`.

> Hint
>
> Think about how you would approach this problem if you did it manually. What part do you see yourself repeating over and over? Can that be put into a loop, and what would the loop iterate through?

### Code

```java
public class GroceryList {
  public static double getTotalCost(double[] groceryPrices) {
    double totalCost = 0.0;

    return totalCost;
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Below are some sample values you can use to run your code.
    // When you're ready, uncomment the following lines one at a time to test each case. Before running each test case, think about what value you expect to see printed out.
    double[] groceryPrices = {10.0, 12.3, 8.45, 2.43};
    // System.out.println(getTotalCost(groceryPrices));

    double[] unlikelyGroceryPrices = {100.23, -100.23, 0.0, -78.54};
    // System.out.println(getTotalCost(unlikelyGroceryPrices));
  }
}
```

### Solution

```java
public static double getTotalCost(double[] groceryPrices) {
  double totalCost = 0.0;
  for (double itemCost : groceryPrices) {
    totalCost += itemCost;
  }
  return totalCost;
}
```

Here we use an enhanced for loop. The `itemCost` variable stores the value of each grocery price, so we can add that value to `totalCost`.

## 2. Most Expensive Grocery Item

### Questions

Oh no! You spent most of your money on burritos, which puts you over budget given all of the groceries on the list.

All the items in the grocery list cost a total of $33.09, but you only have $31.89. Given that every item in the list costs at least $1.20 and there is at least one item in the list, you can remove one item to stay within your budget. Update the `.getMostExpensiveItemCost()` method to find the most expensive item in the array of `groceryPrices`, and return the item.

> Hint
>
> Our aim is to find the largest number in the entire list. If we were to do this manually, we would look at each number, one by one, and compare that number to the maximum number we have so far.

> Hint
>
> We can translate our manual steps into code. This is where a loop can come in handy (to iterate through each element in the array). The comparisons can be done in the loop, so we don't have to write each comparison.

### Code

```java
public class GroceryList {
  public static double getMostExpensiveItemCost(double[] groceryPrices) {
    // We can set the maxCost initially to the first item without an IndexOutOfBounds error because we can assume there is at least one item in the array.
    double maxCost = groceryPrices[0];

    return maxCost;
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Below is a sample test case you can use to run your code.
    // Try playing around with different values in the array to test edge cases
   double[] groceryPrices = {10.0, 12.3, 8.45, 2.34};
   System.out.println(getMostExpensiveItemCost(groceryPrices));
  }
}
```

### Solution

```java
public static double getMostExpensiveItemCost(double[] groceryPrices) {
  double maxCost = groceryPrices[0];
  for (double itemCost : groceryPrices) {
    if (maxCost < itemCost) {
      maxCost = itemCost;
    }
  }
  return maxCost;
}
```

We use an enhanced for loop again, however, this time we are also keeping track of a variable named `maxCost`. Whenever we find a value in our list greater than `maxCost`, we have to update that value. Note that the starting value for `maxCost` is the first item in the array. This is an assumption of our method. If we gave this method an empty array, we would run into an error.

### Extra Challenge

How would you modify your solution to return the cheapest item in the array of `groceryPrices`?

> Hint
>
> Our current solution looks for the biggest item in the grocery list. To find the smallest, we just need to reverse the condition that checks for the biggest item.

### Super Extra Challenge

Now, let's assume that each item costs at least $0.00. How would you modify your solution to return the cost of the item that, when removed, allows you to spend the most money? (Remember, the total should still stay within the limits of your budget.)

> Hint
>
> There are a couple of ways to do this. One way is to expand on our solution for the previous challenges with some modifications. As we iterate through each item in the array, what constraints are we adding on that would make an item eligible for removal?

> Hint
>
> What extra steps can we take to find the smallest item among the eligible items for removal?

## 3. Lengthy Groceries

### Questions

You recall a conversation you had with your friend, who mentioned that they are allergic to foods that have more than 5 letters in the name. How many items in the grocery list is your friend allergic to?

Update the `.getNumAlllergicItems()` method to count up the number of items in `groceryList` that has more than 5 letters. Set it to `numAllergicItems`.

> Hint
>
> `Strings` have a `.length()` method that will return the number of characters in the string.

### Code

```java
public class GroceryList {
  public static int getNumAllergicItems(String[] groceryList) {
    int numAllergicItems = 0;

    return numAllergicItems;
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Below is a sample test case you can use to run your code.
    // Try playing around with different values in the array to test edge cases
    String[] groceryList = {"apple", "milk", "banana", "bananas", "chocolate"};

    System.out.println(getNumAllergicItems(groceryList));
  }
}
```

### Solution

```java
public static int getNumAllergicItems(String[] groceryList) {
  int numAllergicItems = 0;
  for (int i = 0; i < groceryList.length; i++) {
    if (groceryList[i].length() > 5) {
      numAllergicItems++;
    }
  }
  return numAllergicItems;
}
```

We chose to use a regular for loop here, but we could have used an enhanced for loop. For every element in the array, we need to look at its length to see if it is greater than `5` characters long.

## 4. Special Item

### Questions

As you enter the store, a greeter congratulates you on being their 99th customer! Any item in your cart that ends with 99 cents will make your entire bill $0.00!

Update the `.hasSpecialItem()` method to return `true` if there is an item in your list that ends with 99 cents, and `false` if there is not an item that ends with 99 cents.

> Hint
>
> There are a couple of ways you can determine if a number ends with $0.99.
>
> -   One way is to cast the number as a `String` and check the last two characters. Check out the substring documentation [here](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/String.html#substring-int-int-).
> -   Another way could be to use the mod, `%`, operator and check if you can mod the price by 1. Before you check for equality, you may need to isolate the first two decimal places, which you can do by multiplying by 100 and using `Math.floor()`.

### Code

```java
public class GroceryList {
  public static boolean hasSpecialItem(double[] groceryPrices) {

    return false;
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Below is a sample test case you can use to run your code.
    // Try playing around with different values in the array to test edge cases
    double[] groceryList = {10.0, 89.9, 8.99, 2.34};
    System.out.println(hasSpecialItem(groceryList));
  }
}
```

### Solution

```java
public static boolean hasSpecialItem(double[] groceryPrices) {
  for (double itemCost : groceryPrices) {
    String itemCostStr = String.valueOf(itemCost);
    if (itemCostStr.length() > 1 && itemCostStr.substring(itemCostStr.length() - 2, itemCostStr.length()).equals("99")) {
      return true;
    }
  }
  return false;
}
```

This one is all about checking the characters in a String. We use `substring` to grab the last 2 characters of the String. Note that we first make sure that our String is at least 2 characters long! In code challenges like this, it's often important to think about those edge cases!

## 5. Alphabetical Items

### Questions

The grocery store organizes all of its items in ascending alphabetical order. Before you head out, you want to check to make sure that your list is alphabetized so you can pick up your items more quickly. For example, apples are in the first aisle, bean sprouts are in the second, followed by bubble gum, and zucchini comes last. When comparing characters, spaces come before any alphabetical letter (e.g. bean sprouts come before beans).

Update the `isAlphabetized()` method to return `true` if the list is in ascending alphabetical order or `false` if it is not.

> Hint
>
> Think about the different edge cases the grocery list could have. If there was one or no items in the `groceryList`, what should we return?

> Hint
>
> If there are two or more items in the array, then we have to check for alphabetical order. We will need to compare two consecutive items at any given time.

> Hint
>
> `Strings` have a `.compareTo()` method that will return a positive number if the string in the argument is greater than the first string, and negative if the string in the argument is less than the first string. Check out the documentation [here](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/String.html#compareTo-java.lang.String-).

> Hint
>
> Since we're trying to compare two elements of an array, how can we avoid an `IndexOutOfBounds` error? Should the two counters that access the consecutive items have to traverse the entire array?

### Code

```java
public class GroceryList {
  public static boolean isAlphabetized(String[] groceryList) {

    return true;
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Below is a sample test case you can use to run your code.
    // Try playing around with different values in the array to test edge cases
    String[] groceryList = {"apples", "banana", "bananas", "chocolate"};
    System.out.println(isAlphabetized(groceryList));
  }
}
```

### Solution

```java
public static boolean isAlphabetized(String[] groceryList) {
  if (groceryList.length > 1) {
    String lastGroceryItem = groceryList[0];
    for (int i = 1; i < groceryList.length; i++) {
      if (lastGroceryItem.compareTo(groceryList[i]) > 0) {
        return false;
      }
      lastGroceryItem = groceryList[i];
    }
  }
  return true;
}
```

There's a few tricky parts to this one. First, notice where our loop starts. We start our loop at 1 rather than 0. This is because we compare the String at position `i` to the String at the position right before `i`. If we were to start at 0, there wouldn't be String before that index, and we would get an error. Another way to solve this would be to compare the String at position `i` with the next String. If we were to do that, we'd want to start at 0, but end at the second to last String. We would need to do this because there would be no "next" String to compare the last String to.

Next we use `.compareTo()` to do the actual comparison. If the Strings are in the wrong order, then comparing the previous string to current string will result in a positive number, and we return `false`.

If we make it through the whole array without returning `false`, then we know all Strings were in the correct order and we return `true`.

### Extra Challenge

Given a `groceryList`, create a method that orders your grocery list in ascending alphabetical order and returns the alphabetized list.

> Hint
>
> One way to look at this problem is to think about how we would find the "smallest" element, or the element that should come first in the list? From there, we can perform a swap with the first element. Then, we'll want to find the "smallest" element among the elements (excluding the first one), perform a swap, and move on to the third element.

> Hint
>
> Given the above, how can we use loops to repeat the same actions for every element in the array?

## 6. Duplicate Items

### Questions

Looking at your grocery list, you suspect there may be duplicates. To make sure you don't buy more items than you need, how would you check if there is more than one instance of any item in the array?

For simplicity, we can assume that any items that are capitalized are different from items with letters that are all lower case. For example, "apples" are not the same as "appLes".

Update `.hasDuplicateItems()` to return a boolean if there are duplicate items in the list.

> Hint
>
> There are several ways we can approach this. One straightforward way is to think about how we would solve this problem if we had one string and check if there was another instance of the string in the array.

> Hint
>
> From there, we can expand it to two strings, then three, and so on. What repetition do we start to see, and can we use loops to remove duplicate code?

> Hint
>
> Using our approach from the last hint, we can apply the same principle to our array here. Instead of having two separate arrays, we can reuse the same array and iterate through the same array twice using nested loops.

### Code

```java
public class GroceryList {
  public static boolean hasDuplicates(String[] groceryList) {

    return false;
  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Below is a sample test case you can use to run your code.
    // Try playing around with different values in the array to test edge cases
    String[] groceryList = {"apples", "banana", "Apples", "chocolate"};
    System.out.println(hasDuplicates(groceryList));
  }
}
```

### Solution

```java
public static boolean hasDuplicates(String[] groceryList) {
  for (int i = 0; i < groceryList.length - 1; i++) {
    for (int j = i + 1; j < groceryList.length; j++) {
      if (groceryList[i] == groceryList[j]) {
       return true;
      }
    }
  }
  return false;
}
```

This is a good example of nested for loops. For every item in the array, we want to compare it to every other item. The first loop covers the "for every item in the array" part, and the second loop compares it to every other item.

One small detail to note is the starting value for `j`. Think about why we start `j` at `i + 1` every time we start the second loop. Why would it be bad if `j` was ever equal to `i`? If that were the case, we would be comparing an item in the array to itself! We would say that we found a duplicate because an item would match with itself.

### Extra Challenge

Say you have a grocery list (represented by an array), and a list of items in your pantry (a separate array). How would you check to make sure your grocery list does not contain items that are already in your pantry?

> Hint
>
> In the original challenge, we're able to determine if there are duplicates within the same array. We could apply the same concept by thinking about the pantry list as the "same" list as the grocery list. The biggest difference we would need to account for is the possibility of differing array lengths.

## 7. Reverse Grocery List

### Questions

WOOF! While you are looking at your grocery list, your dog ran across your lap and rearranged the order of the items in your `groceryList`. This time, it caused the items in your `groceryList` to be rearranged in reverse order. For example, your original list looked like this: `["banana", "chocolate", "cookies", "ice cream"]`, but now it looks like this: `["ice cream", "cookies", "chocolate", "banana"]`.

Without creating a new array, update the `.reverseGroceries()` method to reverse the `groceriesList` back to normal.

> Hint
>
> One thing we can observe about reversed arrays is that the first element is where the last element should be, and the last element is where the first element should be. The second element is where the second to last element should be, and the second to last element is where the second element should be, and so on.

> Hint
>
> Using the observation above, we actually don't need to traverse the entire array. We could have a counter to run through the first half of the array, and a separate counter to run through the second half of the array but backwards.

> Hint
>
> When swapping items, you'll need a temporary variable to hold your value while you replace the items. For example, if I want to swap `a` and `b`, I'll need to store the value of `a` into `c` before I transfer `b` into `a`:  
> `int a = 0;   int b = 1;   int c = a;   int a = b;   int b = c;`

### Code

```java
public class GroceryList {
  public static void reverseGroceries(String[] groceryList) {

  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Below is a sample test case you can use to run your code.
    // Try playing around with different values in the array to test edge cases
    String[] groceryList = {"apples", "banana", "Apples", "chocolate"};
    reverseGroceries(groceryList);

    for (String item : groceryList) {
      System.out.println(item);
    }
  }
}
```

### Solution

```java
public static void reverseGroceries(String[] groceryList) {
  int j = groceryList.length - 1;
  for (int i = 0; i < groceryList.length/2; i++) {
    String temp = groceryList[i];
    groceryList[i] = groceryList[j];
    groceryList[j] = temp;
    j--;
  }
}
```

The basis for this solution is to use two counters to keep track of the elements at both ends of the list, so we can swap them on each iteration of the loop. Before we start the loop, we want to create a variable, `j`, to hold the index at the end of the list, and we'll use our counter in the loop to hold the index at the start of the loop, `i`.

As `i` works its way towards the end of the list, we want `j` to work its way towards the front of the list. This is why we decrement `j` at the end of the loop, and the loop takes care of incrementing `i`. Eventually our two counters will meet at the middle, and at this point we should stop the loop, which is why the loop is set to terminate when i hits the middle of the array, `groceryList.length/2`. Otherwise we will end up swapping the elements back to their original position.

All that's left is the actual swapping. We can borrow the same concept for swapping that was outlined in one of the hints. We create a temporary variable, `temp`, to store the contents at index `i`, while we put the contents of index `j` into index `i`. This prevents the original value at `i` from getting lost. Finally, we set the element at index `j` to `temp`, which holds the original value at `i`.

One thing to note is that arrays are mutable, and the array that gets passed in as an argument is passed by reference. This means that any changes that are made to array will be reflected in any other place that accesses the same array. So after we run this method, we can print out the original array and verify that its contents are changed.

## 8. Rotate Grocery List

### Questions

MEOW! You just fixed your list, but your cat ran across your lap to chase after your dog! Thankfully, it's still in the right order, but the starting point of the list is now the last item in the list.

This means that the last element in the list should be the first item, the first item in the list should be the second item, and so on. For example, your original list looked like this: `["banana", "chocolate", "cookies", "ice cream"]`, but now it looks like this: `["ice cream", "banana", "chocolate", "cookies"]`.

Without creating a new array, update the `.rotateGroceries()` method to rotate the items one place to the right.

> Hint
>
> When we think about how we would do this manually, what are the steps that we would take. Make sure to consider all of your use cases, like how would your code handle the rotation when there are no elements or only one element in the grocery list? In this case, we might not need to take any action on the array.

> Hint
>
> In order to perform the rotations, we will need to do some swapping. When swapping items, you'll need a temporary variable to hold your value while you replace the items. For example, if I want to swap `a` and `b`, I'll need to store the value of `a` into `c` before I transfer `b` into `a`:  
> `int a = 0;   int b = 1;   int c = a;   int a = b;   int b = c;`

> Hint
>
> Now that we know how to swap items, we know that we will need to do this for every element in the array, which we can use a loop to help us with the repetition. We can build on this method of swapping elements.

> Hint
>
> One way is to use a "temporary" variable to hold the value of the previous element between each iteration through the loop. Then we can use another "temporary" variable to hold the value so we can swap between the current element and the "previous temporary" variable.

> Hint
>
> Another way could be to iterate through the array backwards, with two counters: one to keep track of the index of the current element and another to track the index of element before. Then, in every iteration of the loop, we can perform swap between the current element and element before it.

### Code

```java
public class GroceryList {
  public static void rotateGroceries(String[] groceryList) {

  }

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Below is a sample test case you can use to run your code.
    // Try playing around with different values in the array to test edge cases
    String[] groceryList = {"apples", "banana", "Apples", "chocolate"};
    rotateGroceries(groceryList);

    for (String item : groceryList) {
      System.out.println(item);
    }
  }
}
```

### Solution

```java
public static void rotateGroceries(String[] groceryList) {
  if (groceryList.length > 1) {
    String previous = groceryList[groceryList.length - 1];
    for (int i = 0; i < groceryList.length; i++) {
      String temp = groceryList[i];
      groceryList[i] = previous;
      previous = temp;
    }
  }
}
```

For this solution, we want to use a temporary variable as a substitute for our "previous" element. This way, on every iteration of the loop, it will always hold the original value of the element that comes before the current variable that is tracked by our `i` counter. Since the loop begins at the first index and ends at the last index, we need to preset the value of the temporary variable, `previous`, to the element that comes before the first element in the array (the last element in the array).

In order to avoid an `IndexOutOfBounds` error, we only want to perform this on arrays that have a length that's greater than 1. (Technically we could set the condition to be greater than 0, but we don't need to do any swapping when there's only 1 element in the array.)

All that's left is to swap between the element at index `i` with the `previous` variable, similar to what we did in the previous challenge. We need another temporary variable, `temp`, to store the contents at index `i`, while we put the contents of `previous` into index `i`. This prevents the original value at `i` from getting lost. Finally, we set `previous` to `temp`, which holds the original value at `i`. This updates `previous` so that it is ready on the next iteration with the latest previous value.

One thing to note is that arrays are mutable, and the array that gets passed in as an argument is passed by reference. This means that any changes that are made to array will be reflected in any other place that accesses the same array. So after we run this method, we can print out the original array and verify that its contents are changed.

Great work! Some of these code challenges were pretty difficult! You're becoming a pro at working with loops and arrays!
