# Quiz: Recursion Concepts

## Question 1: What is the _call stack_?

-   A data structure typically abstracted away from us which is unnecessary when using iteration.
    -   **Incorrect**: The call stack contains each recursive call with the function’s execution context, but it also contains iterative functions.
-   A data structure typically abstracted away from us which retrieves recursive calls from the computer’s RAM.
-   A data structure typically abstracted away from us which stores additional memory when necessary.
-   **Correct**: A data structure typically abstracted away from us which stores function calls in programs.

## Question 2: What is the purpose of the base case in a recursive function?

-   In the base case, the function’s values are returned.
-   In the base case, the function recurses one step closer to terminating.
-   **Correct**: In the base case, there is no recursive function call. We can think of the base case like the terminating condition of an iterative loop.
-   In the base case, the function switches from base 10 to base 2.

## Question 3: When analyzing the Big O runtime of recursive functions, we count the \_\_\_\_.

-   Relationship of input to stack overflows.
-   **Correct**: Relation of input to function calls.
-   Relation of input to loop iterations.
-   Relationship of input to base cases.
    -   **Incorrect**: The relationship of function calls to input size determines the Big O runtime.

## Question 4: A function will not recurse if the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is reached.

-   Best case.
-   **Correct**: Base case. The recursive step will bring us closer to the base case, where no recursion takes place.
-   Divide step.
-   Recursive step.

## Question 5: What are the two main sections of a recursive function?

-   The base case and the basest case.
-   **Correct**: The base case and the recursive step. The base case has no recursive call and the recursive step has a recursive call that moves closer to the base case.
-   The recursive step and the termination phase.
-   The base case and the repeating step.

## Question 6: What is an _execution context_ and how does it relate to recursion?

-   **Correct**: An execution context contains the variables within each recursive function call. Separate recursive calls each have their own variables.
-   An execution context contains the function definition without additional arguments to recursive function calls.
-   An execution context contains the total amount of recursive function calls.
-   An execution context contains the iterations within the initial function call.

## Question 7: Recursion is typically more efficient than iteration.

-   True.
-   **Correct**: False. Recursion has additional overhead of function frames on the call stack.

## Question 8: A recursive function which has no base case, or a recursive step that does not lead to the base case, will cause what?

-   A queue overflow.
-   A queue underflow.
-   **Correct**: A stack overflow. Recursive calls will fill the call stack until there is no room left.
-   A stack underflow.

## Question 9: What is the importance of the _recursive step_?

-   It retrieves a return value.
-   It removes one element from a list.
-   It prevents a stack overflow.
-   **Correct**: It recursively calls the function with an argument which will reach the base case. The recursive step will be the equivalent of an infinite loop and cause a stack overflow if it doesn’t move closer to a base case.

## Question 10: Which of the following describes a recursive approach?

-   To print the spelling of a name, use a for loop with an index variable to access each letter.
-   To compute a factorial number, declare a result variable and loop through each number from 1 to the input number, storing the product of that number with result.
-   To iterate through a list, create a counting variable which is incremented through the length of the list.
-   **Correct**: To compute a factorial number, multiply the number by the factorial number minus one. This is recursive because we’re describing the problem in terms of itself.
