# Quiz: Recursion in Java

## Question 1: Finding a Node Recursively

Fill in the `.findNodeRecursively()` method, so it returns the correct node when found, or `null` if not found.

**Code Example**

```java
public Node findNodeRecursively(String data, Node currentNode) {
    if (currentNode == null) {
        return null;
    } else if (currentNode.data == data) {
        return currentNode;
    } else {
        return this.findNodeRecursively(data, currentNode.getNextNode());
    }
}
```

## Question 2: Recursive Sum

Fill in the code, so `recursiveSum()` recursively finds the sum of a number and all positive numbers less than it.

**Code Example**

```java
public static int recursiveSum(int n) {
    if (n == 1) {
        return 1;
    } else {
        return recursiveSum(n - 1) + n;
    }
}
```

## Question 3: Recursive Factorial

Fill in the code, so `recursiveFactorial()` recursively finds the factorial solution to an argument and returns it.

**Code Example**

```java
public static int recursiveFactorial(int n) {
    if (n > 0) {
        return recursiveFactorial(n - 1) * n;
    } else {
        return 1;
    }
}
```

## Question 4: Conditions for Finding a Node Recursively

Fill in the correct conditions for the `.findNodeRecursively()` method.

**Code Example**

```java
public Node findNodeRecursively(String data, Node currentNode) {
    if (currentNode == null) {
        return null;
    } else if (currentNode.data == data) {
        return currentNode;
    } else {
        return this.findNodeRecursively(data, currentNode.getNextNode());
    }
}
```

## Question 5: Recursive Case in Linked List

The code displays a recursive solution to finding a node in a linked list. Which of the following is the condition for the recursive case?

**Code Example**

```java
public Node findNodeRecursively(String data, Node currentNode) {
    if (currentNode == null) {
        return null;
    } else if (currentNode.data == data) {
        return currentNode;
    } else {
        return this.findNodeRecursively(data, currentNode.getNextNode());
    }
}
```

**Answer Choices**

-   `currentNode == null`
-   `currentNode.data == data`
-   **Correct**: The recursive condition is if `currentNode.data == data` and `currentNode == null` are not `true`. The recursive case executes if the first two conditions are not true.

## Question 6: Error Without Base Case

Which of the following errors often occurs if you do not include a base case in your recursive function?

**Answer Choices**

-   **Correct**: A stack overflow. If the function does not have a base case, then it may continue to call itself indefinitely.
-   A value error
-   Key error
-   Import error

## Question 7: Call Stack for Recursive Factorial

The function `recursiveFactorial()` uses recursion to find the factorial solution to the argument passed into it. Which of the following is a realistic call stack for the call `recursiveFactorial(3)`?

**Answer Choices**

-   1. `recursiveFactorial(1)` = `1 * recursiveFactorial(0)`
    2. `recursiveFactorial(2)` = `2 * recursiveFactorial(1)`
    3. `recursiveFactorial(3)` = `3 * recursiveFactorial(2)`
-   1. `recursiveFactorial(2)` = `2 * recursiveFactorial(1)`
    2. `recursiveFactorial(1)` = `1 * recursiveFactorial(0)`
    3. `recursiveFactorial(3)` = `3 * recursiveFactorial(2)`
-   1. `recursiveFactorial(3)` = `3 * recursiveFactorial(2)`
-   **Correct**: 1. `recursiveFactorial(3)` = `3 * recursiveFactorial(2)` 2. `recursiveFactorial(2)` = `2 * recursiveFactorial(1)` 3. `recursiveFactorial(1)` = `1 * recursiveFactorial(0)`
    The `recursiveFactorial()` function will call itself with inputs of `0`, `1`, `2`, and `3` and multiply the solution by `n+1` values.
