# Java: Introduction to Classes

## Introduction to Classes

In every Java program, classes serve as representations of the real world. A class is a template for creating objects in Java, acting as a blueprint for the representation of a real-world object. A class outlines the necessary components and how they interact with each other. For example, consider a program designed to monitor student test scores. This program can include classes such as `Student` and `Grade` to represent real-world entities of students and their grades. The `Student` class, representing a student, will have fields to store the student ID, all courses the student can enroll in, and several other fields that capture relevant information.

We represent each student as an instance, or object, of the `Student` class. This is object-oriented programming: programs are built using objects.

Let’s consider another example: a savings account at a bank. Relevant details of a savings account might include:

-   Name of the owner
-   Bank account number
-   Amount of money in the account

Functions a savings account might have:

-   Deposit money
-   Withdraw money

We can represent this data in a class called `SavingsAccount`. Imagine two people each have a bank account. Each of their accounts will be represented by an instance of the `SavingsAccount` class.

## Classes: Syntax

Let’s explore how to define a class in Java using a class called `Car` that represents a real-world car. The `Car` class in Java is defined like so:

```java
public class Car {
    // Empty Java Class
}
```

In this example, a class named `Car` is defined with the `public` keyword. Inside the body of the class, we can add fields to represent relevant information and functions to represent how this class can interact with other objects.

## Classes: Constructors

In Java, the constructor is a special type of method defined within the class, used to initialize fields when an instance of the class is created. The name of the constructor method must be the same as the class itself. Generally, the constructor is defined as `public`.

Let’s look at an updated `Car` class, which includes a constructor:

```java
public class Car {
    // Constructor
    public Car() {
        // instructions for creating a Car instance
    }
}
```

In the following example, the Car instance is assigned to the variable `ferrari`:

```java
Car ferrari = new Car();
```

In this example, we have created an instance of a `Car` class called `ferrari`. After the assignment operator (`=`), we call the constructor method, `Car()`, using the keyword `new` to indicate that we’re creating a new instance of the `Car` class. Omitting the `new` keyword causes an error.

**Note for AP Computer Science A Students**: If we print the value of the variable `ferrari`, we would see its memory address: `Car@76ed5528`. In the above example, our variable `ferrari` is declared as a reference data type rather than with a primitive data type like `int` or `boolean`. This means that the variable holds a reference to the memory address of an instance. During its declaration, we specify the class name as the variable’s type, which in this case is `Car`.

If we use a special value, `null`, we can initialize a reference-type variable without giving it a reference. If we were to assign `null` to an object, it would have a void reference because `null` has no value. For example:

```java
Car thunderBird = new Car();
System.out.println(thunderBird); // Prints: Car@76ed5528
thunderBird = null; // change value to null
System.out.println(thunderBird); // Prints: null
```

It’s important to understand that using a null reference to call a method or access an instance variable will result in a `NullPointerException` error.

## Classes: Instance Fields

A real car has characteristics such as brand, model, year, color, etc. In a Java object representing a car, these characteristics are represented by _instance fields_ or _instance variables_. Instance variables are often characterized by their “has-a” relationship with the object. For example, a `Car` “has-a” color, “has-a” make, “has-a” model name, and “has-a” model year.

We want our `Car` objects to have different colors, so we declare an instance field called `color`:

```java
public class Car {
    /*
     declare fields inside the class
     by specifying the type and name
    */
    public String color;
    public int year;
    public String modelName;
    public String make;

    public Car() {
        /*
         instance fields available in
         scope of the constructor method
        */
    }
}
```

Instance variables are specific to each instance of the class, which means that each object created from the class will have its own copy of these variables. These fields can be set in the following three ways:

-   If they are `public`, they can be set like this: `instanceName.fieldName = someValue;`
-   They can be set by class methods.
-   They can be set by the constructor method.

## Classes: Constructor Parameters

In Java, parameters are placeholders that we can use to pass information to a method. Since the constructor is a method, we can include parameters to assign values to instance fields. Here the `Car` constructor has a parameter: `String carColor`:

```java
public class Car {
    public String color;
    // constructor method with a parameter
    public Car(String carColor) {
        // parameter value assigned to the field
        color = carColor;
    }
}
```

Now, when we create a new instance of the `Car` class and pass in a string value to the constructor, it will be stored in the parameter `carColor`. Inside the constructor, we can use this passed value however we want. In our example, we assign the value stored in `carColor` to the instance field `color`.

A method can be characterized by its **signature**, which is the name, number of, and parameters of the method. In the above example, the signature is `Car(String carColor)`.

There are two types of parameters: formal and actual. The parameter we defined in the above example, `String carColor`, is a formal parameter. We can think of them as variables that will store the data that is passed into a method. It specifies the type and name of the data.

**Note for AP Computer Science A Students**: A class can have multiple constructors. We can differentiate them based on their parameters. The signature helps the compiler to differentiate between different methods. For example, here we have defined two constructors:

```java
public class Car {
    public String color;
    public int mpg;
    public boolean isElectric;
    // constructor 1
    public Car(String carColor, int milesPerGallon) {
        color = carColor;
        mpg = milesPerGallon;
    }
    // constructor 2
    public Car(boolean electricCar, int milesPerGallon) {
        isElectric = electricCar;
        mpg = milesPerGallon;
    }
}
```

The first constructor has two parameters: `String carColor` and `int milesPerGallon`. The second one has these: `boolean electricCar` and `int milesPerGallon`. The values will help the compiler to decide which constructor to use. For example, `Car myCar = new Car(true, 40)` will be created by the second constructor because the arguments match the type and order of the second constructor’s signature.

When we don’t define the constructor, the Java compiler creates a default constructor that assigns default values to an instance. Default values can be created by assigning values to the instance fields during their declaration:

```java
public class Car {
    public String color = "red";
    public boolean isElectric = false;
    public int cupHolders = 4;
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Car myCar = new Car();
        System.out.println(myCar.color); // Prints: red
    }
}
```

Notice that the color instance field of the `myCar` object will have a red value because we’ve already defined the default value during the declaration.

## Classes: Assigning Values to Instance Fields

Since the constructor now accepts a parameter, let’s see how we can use this constructor to create an instance of an object with initial values for its fields. To use the constructor, we call it just as we would an ordinary method and pass in values for the parameters. These values, known as **arguments**, will be used to initialize the instance fields of the created object.

Let’s revisit our previous example of the `Car` class:

```java
public class Car {
    public String color;
    public Car(String carColor) {
        // assign parameter value to instance field
        color = carColor;
    }
}
```

In this case, when creating a specific instance of `Car` called `ferrari`, we pass the string “red” as the value for the `carColor` parameter:

```java
class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Car ferrari = new Car("red");
    }
}
```

When passing in values to a constructor, just like an ordinary method, the type of the value must match the type of the parameter. In the code, we pass the `String` value “red” to the constructor method call: `new Car("red")`. The parameter `carColor` of type `String` now refers to the value passed in during the method call, which is “red”. The field `color` of the object `ferrari` now has a value of “red”.

Remember, we can access the fields of an object by using the dot operator like so:

```java
ferrari.color; // "red"
```

**Note for AP Computer Science A Students**: An argument refers to the actual values passed during the method call while a parameter refers to the variables declared in the method signature. When we pass an argument, a copy of the argument value is passed to the parameter rather than the actual variables. This process of calling a method with an argument value is called a call-by-value. For example, we passed the `String` value “red” as an argument, but a copy of this value is assigned to the parameter `carColor`.

## Classes: Multiple Fields

Objects are not limited to a single instance field. We can declare as many fields as necessary for our program’s requirements. To illustrate this, let’s add two more instance fields to our Car instances. We’ll add a `boolean isRunning`, which represents whether the car engine is on or not, and an `int velocity`, which indicates the speed at which the car is traveling:

```java
public class Car {
    String color;
    // new fields!
    boolean isRunning;
    int velocity;
    // new parameters that correspond to the new fields
    public Car(String carColor, boolean carRunning, int milesPerHour) {
        color = carColor;
        // assign new parameters to the new fields
        isRunning = carRunning;
        velocity = milesPerHour;
    }
}
```

```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // new values passed into the method call
        Car ferrari = new Car("red", true, 27);
        Car renault = new Car("blue", false, 70);
        System.out.println(renault.isRunning); // false
        System.out.println(ferrari.velocity); // 27
    }
}
```

Now, the constructor has two new parameters: `boolean carRunning` and `int milesPerHour`. Remember, it’s important to pass the arguments in the same order as they are listed in the parameters:

```java
// values match types, no error
Car honda = new Car("green", false, 0);
// values do not match types, error!
Car junker = new Car(true, 42, "brown");
```

## Classes: Review

Object-oriented programming revolves around classes and objects. The class is a fundamental concept of OOP, and programs in Java are built with multiple classes and their objects. Let’s review what we’ve learned throughout this lesson:

-   A class is a blueprint to create instances. It defines the state and behavior of these instances.
-   Every class has a special method called constructor which is invoked when a new object is created. Constructors initialize the state of newly created instances.
-   Instance fields define the characteristics of an object. We can declare them within a class but outside of any method or constructor.
-   We use the dot operator (`.`) to access the instance fields.
-   A program can have multiple classes, instances, and instance fields as per our program’s requirements.

Later, we will explore how a program can be made from multiple classes. For now, our programs have a single class:

```java
public class Dog {
    // instance field
    public String breed;
    // constructor method
    public Dog(String dogBreed) {
        // value of parameter dogBreed assigned to instance field breed
        breed = dogBreed;
    }
}
```

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    // create instance: use 'new' operator and invoke constructor
    Dog fido = new Dog("poodle");
    // fields are accessed using: the instance name, `.` operator, and the field name.
    System.out.println(fido.breed); // Prints "poodle"
}
```
