# Objects as Parameters

This article discusses best practices for sending an object as a constructor parameter in Java, including how to send an object as a parameter and the importance of creating a copy of an object to avoid modifying the original.

## Using an Object as a Parameter

First, let’s create a class called `Cupcake`:

```java
class Cupcake {
    String flavor;
    boolean sprinkles;

    public Cupcake(String type, boolean hasSprinkles) {
        flavor = type;
        sprinkles = hasSprinkles;
    }
}
```

Now, we’ll create a class called `Bakery` whose constructor accepts an object of `Cupcake` as a parameter:

```java
class Bakery {
    Cupcake bakeryCupcake;
    double price;
    String giveTotal;

    public Bakery(Cupcake cupcakeType, double priceOf) {
        bakeryCupcake = cupcakeType;
        price = priceOf;
        giveTotal = "The " + bakeryCupcake.flavor + " cupcake is €" + price;
    }
}
```

Inside the `main()` method of the `Bakery` class, we’ll create a new `Cupcake` object called `chocolateSprinkle`. Then, we’ll create a new `Bakery` object, called `myBakery`, that takes the `chocolateSprinkle` object as a parameter:

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    Cupcake chocolateSprinkle = new Cupcake("chocolate", true);
    Bakery myBakery = new Bakery(chocolateSprinkle, 3.25);
    System.out.println(myBakery.giveTotal);
}
```

When we run this program, we get the following output:

```plaintext
The chocolate cupcake is €3.25
```

## Creating a Copy of an Object

If we use an object as a parameter for a constructor method, it’s a good programming practice to not modify said object unless the situation requires it. If we do find ourselves needing to modify an object sent as a parameter, we should set the instance variable to hold a _copy_ of the referenced object instead of the original object.

Let’s say we added the line `bakeryCupcake.flavor = "vanilla";` to our `Bakery` constructor that changes the `flavor` value of the `chocolateSprinkle` object to `"vanilla"`:

```java
public Bakery(Cupcake cupcakeType, double priceOf) {
    bakeryCupcake = cupcakeType;
    // change cupcake object flavor to vanilla
    bakeryCupcake.flavor = "vanilla";
    price = priceOf;
    giveTotal = "The " + bakeryCupcake.flavor + " cupcake is €" + price;
}
```

What happens to the state of our original `chocolateSprinkle` object after we call the constructor of our `Bakery` object? When an object is sent as an argument, the value sent to the parameter is a reference to the original object and not a copy of the original object; therefore, whenever we make a change to our parameter object, we are also making a change to our original object. Note that this doesn’t happen with primitive values because the parameter value is initialized with a copy of the argument value.

To only change the value of the parameter object and not the original object, we can create a copy of an object using a copy constructor. The _copy constructor_ is an additional class constructor; remember, a class can have multiple constructors as long as each constructor has its own unique signature. Copy constructors create a copy of an object by taking in an object and setting the values of the new object to the same values of the parameter object.

For example, we’ll add a copy constructor to the `Cupcake` class:

```java
class Cupcake {
    String flavor;
    boolean sprinkles;
    // original constructor
    public Cupcake(String type, boolean hasSprinkles) {
        flavor = type;
        sprinkles = hasSprinkles;
    }
    // copy constructor
    public Cupcake(Cupcake copy) {
        flavor = copy.flavor;
        sprinkles = copy.sprinkles;
    }
}
```

We now have a copy constructor, but in order to call it, we need to make a minor change to the `Bakery` constructor:

```java
public Bakery(Cupcake cupcakeType, double priceOf) {
    // Create a copy Cupcake object
    Cupcake copy = new Cupcake(cupcakeType);
    // set bakeryCupcake to hold value of object copy
    bakeryCupcake = copy;
    price = priceOf;
    bakeryCupcake.flavor = "vanilla";
    giveTotal = "The " + bakeryCupcake.flavor + " cupcake is €" + price;
}
```

In our constructor, we created a new object, `copy`, that calls the copy constructor in order to create and store a copy of our parameter object `cupcakeType`. Then, we set our instance variable, `bakeryCupcake`, to store the value of `copy`.

Now that we have a copy of the object, we don’t have to worry about an object sent as a parameter to the `Bakery` class changing the state of our `Cupcake` objects, like `chocolateSprinkle`. By adding a copy constructor to our code, our output changes to reflect that even though we changed the value of an object sent as an argument value, the state of our original object `chocolateSprinkle` remains unchanged:

```plaintext
Our object sent as a parameter has a flavor of vanilla
Our original object has a flavor of chocolate
```

## Conclusion

Let’s recap what we learned:

-   Objects can be sent as a parameter to a constructor.
-   In order to avoid changing the state of the original object, it’s best practice to create a copy of the object sent as a parameter.
-   One method of copying an object is creating a copy constructor that copies the attributes of an object into a new object.
