# What Are Classes, Objects, and Methods? | Codecademy

# A Basic Calculator

## Project Brief

### Objective

Study for the AP Computer Science A Exam (Java)

### A Basic Calculator

In this project, you will use classes, methods, and objects to create a simple arithmetic calculator. The calculator will be able to:

-   Add two integers
-   Subtract two integers
-   Multiply two integers
-   Divide two integers
-   Apply the modulo operator on two integers

The instructions provided are general guidelines. Upon completion of the project, feel free to explore more in the learning environment.

**Important:** Moving forward, all projects will require that you define the `main` method manually. When you click the “Save” button below, an attempt to run your Java code is made. However, Java will return an error if you attempt to run a Java program without first defining a `main` method. If you encounter such an error, do not worry, you can define the `main` method ahead of time in order to avoid seeing the error.

### Tasks

19/19 complete

Mark the tasks as complete by checking them off

## Basic Calculator

1.

Create a `public` class called `Calculator`.

Hint

To create a class called Abacus, for example, you could use syntax like:

```
public class Abacus{}
```

2.

Inside of the class, create a `Calculator()` constructor. You can leave the contents of the constructor empty.

Hint

To create a constructor for an Abacus class, you could use syntax like:

```
public class Abacus{    public Abacus(){   }}
```

3.

Next, create a `public` method that returns an `int` and call it `add()`.

Hint

To make a method called `do_something()` that returns a `double`, for example, you would use syntax like:

```
public double do_something(){}
```

What syntax would you use for a method called `add()` that returns an `int`?

4.

The `add()` method should accept two `int` parameters. For example: `int a, int b`.

Hint

To add two `double` parameters to a method called `do_something()`, you would use syntax like:

```
public double do_something(double first_param, double second_param){}
```

How would you make them two `int` parameters instead?

5.

The `add` method should add the two integer parameters that a user will specify. Inside of the `add` method, `return` the sum of `a` and `b`.

Hint

To return a variable called `result` from the function, you would use syntax like:

```
return result;
```

How would you return `a` plus `b`?

6.

Next, create another similar method called `subtract()`. The `subtract()` method should accept two `int` parameters, just like the `add()` method does.

7.

Inside of the `subtract()` method, `return` the difference of `a` and `b`.

8.

Create another method called `multiply()`. The `multiply()` method should accept two `int` parameters.

9.

Inside of the `multiply` method, `return` the product of `a` and `b`.

10.

Create another method called `divide()`. It should accept two `int` parameters.

11.

Inside of the `divide()` function, return `a` divided by `b`.

12.

Create another method called `modulo`. It should accept two `int` parameters.

13.

Inside of the `modulo()` function, return `a` modulo `b`.

14.

Next, create a `main()` method. Can you remember all the keywords necessary for a `main()` method?

Hint

The `main()` method is defined exactly the same way for every class:

```
public static void main(String[] args){}
```

15.

Inside of `main()`, create a `Calculator` object called `myCalculator`.

Hint

To create a new `Dog` Object, we would use syntax like:

```
Dog myDog = new Dog();
```

How would you do this for the Calculator class?

16.

Print out the value of calling the `add()` method on `myCalculator`. Pass in `5` and `7` as parameters.

Hint

You can either print the result directly:

```
System.out.println(myCalculator.add(5, 7));
```

Or save the result to a variable, and then print the variable:

```
int addition = myCalculator.add(5, 7);System.out.println(addition);
```

17.

On the next line, print out the value of calling the `subtract()` method on `myCalculator`. Pass in `45` and `11` as parameters.

Hint

You can either print the result directly:

```
System.out.println(myCalculator.subtract(45, 11));
```

Or save the result to a variable, and then print the variable:

```
int subtraction = myCalculator.subtract(45, 11);System.out.println(subtraction);
```

18.

If you completed this project correctly, the output should be `12` and `34`. Feel free to explore more with the program. What are some ways in which the program could be improved?

Hint

You could add methods that work with `double`s, for example!

19.

Add comments near the top of the program that describe what the program does.

Hint

For example, you could add a comment like:

```
/*This is an Abacus that is used to slide beads around and do math.It was created by Laura in 2019.*/
```

### Code Review

Get targeted feedback about your code and how well it meets the objective of the project.You can request 1 AI-powered review per project when you complete all tasks.Request code review

## Code Editor

Calculator.java

Fullscreen Code Editor

Enter Fullscreen Code Editor

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

}

public int divide(int a, int b)

{

return a / b;

}

public int module(int a, int b)

{

return a % b;

}

public static void main(String

\[\] args){

Calculator myCalculator = new

Calculator();

System.out.println

(myCalculator.add(5, 7));

System.out.println

(myCalculator.subtract(45,

11));

}

}

ctrl + enter

ctrl + enter

SaveLoading Complete

Copy file

Reset Workspace (ctrl+g)

## Output-only Terminal

Output:

12
34


