# What Are Classes, Objects, and Methods? | Codecademy

# Build A Droid

## Project Brief

### Objective

Study for the AP Computer Science A Exam (Java)

### Build A Droid

We’ve set up a robot workshop to build some droids. All that’s missing are the instructions on how to create the robots and what they’ll do.

Can we write a Java class to help?

We’ll need to define the state and behavior of the droids using instance fields and methods. Let’s get to work!

### Tasks

13/13 complete

Mark the tasks as complete by checking them off

## Defining a Droid

1.

The **Droid.java** file is empty.

Start by defining the class `Droid`.

Don’t forget to include a `main()` method! You can leave it empty for now.

We want a `Droid` object that has the following state:

-   name
-   battery level

and the following behavior:

-   performing a task
-   stating its battery level

Hint

Here’s an example of defining a `Person` class with a `main()` method:

```
public class Person {  public static void main(String[] args) {  }}
```

2.

Declare an instance field called `batteryLevel`. We want to store whole number values in this field.

Hint

Here’s an example of defining an instance field in `Person`:

```
public class Person {  int age;  public static void main(String[] args) {  }}
```

3.

Declare another instance field called `name` which will store our droid’s name.

What type should this be?

Hint

Since `name` will store the text of what we call the `Droid`, `String` would be best.

4.

Create a constructor method for the `Droid` class.

The method should have one parameter of `String droidName`.

Hint

Constructor methods are named after the class. Here’s an example in `Person` that has one parameter:

```
public class Person {  int age;  public Person(int yearsAlive) {  }  public static void main(String[] args) {  }}
```

5.

Inside the constructor, assign the parameter value of `droidName` to the appropriate instance field.

Set the value of `batteryLevel` to `100`. Every new instance of `Droid` will have a `batteryLevel` of `100`.

Hint

Here’s an example of assigning a value to an instance field in the `Person` constructor:

```
public class Person {  int age;  public Person(int yearsAlive) {    age = yearsAlive;  }  public static void main(String[] args) {  }}
```

## Declaring Instances of Drone

6.

Inside `main()`, create a `new` instance of `Droid` named `"Codey"`.

Hint

Here’s an example of creating an instance of `Person`:

```
public class Person {  int age;  public Person(int yearsAlive) {    age = yearsAlive;  }  public static void main(String[] args) {    Person patrick = new Person(32);  }}
```

Don’t forget the `new` keyword!

7.

Print out the variable using `System.out.println()`.

Hint

```
public class Person {  int age;  public Person(int yearsAlive) {    age = yearsAlive;  }  public static void main(String[] args) {    Person patrick = new Person(32);    // printing the variable:    System.out.println(patrick);    // access the age field:    System.out.println(patrick.age);  }}
```

8.

That output isn’t very informative!

Define a `toString()` method within `Droid`.

The return type is `String`.

Inside `toString()`, `return` a string that introduces the `Droid` using their name.

Something like “Hello, I’m the droid: droidNameHere”

Hint

Here’s an example of a `toString()` method for `Person`:

```
public class Person {  int age;  public String toString() {    return "Hey there, I am " + age + " years old!";  }  public Person(int yearsAlive) {    age = yearsAlive;  }  public static void main(String[] args) {    Person patrick = new Person(32);    System.out.println(patrick);  }}
```

## Doing Droid Things

9.

Define a new method: `performTask()`. This method should have a single parameter: `String task`.

This method does not return any value.

Hint

Here’s an example of defining a new method on `Person`:

```
public class Person {  int age;  public void greetAnother(String name) {    System.out.println("Hey there, " + name);  }  public Person(int yearsAlive) {    age = yearsAlive;  }  public static void main(String[] args) {    Person patrick = new Person(32);    patrick.greetAnother("Laura");    // prints: hey there, Laura  }}
```

`void` indicates there is no return value.

10.

Inside `performTask()`, print a statement like “`name` is performing task: `task`“.

For example, `codey.performTask("dancing");` will print:

```
Codey is performing task: dancing
```

11.

Performing tasks is hard work. After the print statement, set `batteryLevel` to be `10` less than it was before.

We’ll need to reassign the instance field to be the current value minus 10.

Hint

Here’s an example of manipulating the `age` instance field:

```
public class Person {  int age;  public void ageOneYear() {    age = age + 1;  }  public Person(int yearsAlive) {    age = yearsAlive;  }  public static void main(String[] args) {    Person patrick = new Person(32);    System.out.println(patrick.age);    // 32    patrick.ageOneYear();    System.out.println(patrick.age);    // 33  }}
```

12.

Have your `Droid` instance perform some tasks inside of `main()`.

Hint

For example, we had our instances do activities like “dancing” and “levitating”.

```
codey.performTask("dancing");margot.performTask("levitating");
```

## Next steps

13.

Create new instances and play around with methods. Here are some ideas to get you started:

-   Create a `energyReport()` method that prints the instance’s `batteryLevel`.
-   Create another instance.
-   Create a method `energyTransfer()` that exchanges `batteryLevel` between instances.

### Code Review

Get targeted feedback about your code and how well it meets the objective of the project.You can request 1 AI-powered review per project when you complete all tasks.Request code review

## Code Editor

Droid.java

Droid.java

Fullscreen Code Editor

Enter Fullscreen Code Editor

19

20

18

22

11

12

13

14

15

17

16

23

21

24

25

26

27

public static void main(String

\[\] args) {

Droid codey = new Droid

("codey");

System.out.println(codey); //

return "Hello, I'm the droid:

}

" + name;

public void performTask(String

task) {

System.out.println(name + "

}

is performing task: " + task);

Droid@1dbd16a6

batteryLevel -= 10;

codey.performTask("dancing");

Droid margot = new Droid

("margot");

margot.performTask

}

("levitating");

}

ctrl + enter

ctrl + enter

SaveLoading Complete

Copy file

Reset Workspace (ctrl+g)

## Output-only Terminal

Output:

Hello, I'm the droid: codey
codey is performing task: dancing
margot is performing task: levitating


